           T h e A m e r i c a n Y aw p




© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
    The
A meric a n
   Y aw p
A Massively Collaborative Open U.S. History Textbook
                           vol. 1: to 1877

e di t e d by jose ph l . l ock e a n d be n w r igh t




 sta n f or d u n i v e r si t y pr e s s    •    sta n f or d, c a l i f or n i a

    © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
             Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
      Stanford University Press
      Stanford, California

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
      Some rights reserved.

      [[[Insert logo]]]



      This book is licensed under the Creative Commons license CC BY-SA 4.0, Attribution-
      ShareAlike. This license permits commercial and non-commercial use of this work,
      so long as attribution is given. For more information about the license, visit
      https://​creativecommons​.org/​licenses/​by​-sa/​4​.0/.

      Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, archival-quality paper

      Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

      Names: Locke, Joseph L., editor. | Wright, Ben, editor.
      Title: The American yawp : a massively collaborative open U.S. history textbook /
        edited by Joseph L. Locke and Ben Wright.
      Description: Stanford, California : Stanford University Press, 2019. |
        Includes bibliographical references and index.
      Identifiers: LCCN 2018015206 (print) | LCCN 2018017638 (ebook) |
        ISBN 9781503608139 (e-book) | ISBN 9781503606715 | ISBN 9781503606715
        (v. 1 :pbk. :alk. paper) | ISBN 9781503606883(v. 2 :pbk. :alk. paper) |
        ISBN 9781503608139(v. 1 :ebook) | ISBN 9781503608146(v. 2 :ebook)
      Subjects: LCSH: United States—History—Textbooks.
      Classification: LCC E178.1 (ebook) | LCC E178.1 .A493673 2019 (print) |
        DDC 973—dc23
      LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018015206

      Typeset by Newgen in Sabon LT 11/15
      Cover illustration: Detail from “Grand Democratic Free Soil Banner,” by N. Currier and
      John Plumbe Jr., 1848. Source: Susan H. Douglas Political Americana Collection, Division
      of Rare and Manuscript Collections, Cornell University Library.




© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Yawp \yôp\ n: 1: a raucous noise 2: rough vigorous language
“I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.”
                                                  Walt Whitman, 1854




        © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                 Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Contents


    Preface                                                             ix


 1. The New World                                                        1

 2. Colliding Cultures                                                 28

 3. British North America                                              54

 4. Colonial Society                                                   81

 5. The American Revolution                                           109

 6. A New Nation                                                      143

 7. The Early Republic                                                170

 8. The Market Revolution                                             198

 9. Democracy in America                                              227

10. Religion and Reform                                               253

11. The Cotton Revolution                                             283

12. Manifest Destiny                                                  315

13. The Sectional Crisis                                              343

14. The Civil War                                                     371

15. Reconstruction                                                    402


    Contributors                                                      435




        © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                 Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Preface


We are the heirs of our history. Our communities, our politics, our cul-       Civil rights march
                                                                               from Selma to
ture: it is all a product of the past. As William Faulkner wrote, “The past    Montgomery,
is never dead. It’s not even past.”1 To understand who we are, we must         Alabama, in
therefore understand our history.                                              1965. Library of
                                                                               Congress.
    But what is history? What does it mean to study the past? History
can never be the simple memorizing of names and dates (how would we
even know what names and dates are worth studying?). It is too com-
plex a task and too dynamic a process to be reduced to that. It must be
something more because, in a sense, it is we who give life to the past.
Historians ask historical questions, weigh evidence from primary sources
(material produced in the era under study), grapple with rival interpre-
tations, and argue for their conclusions. History, then, is our ongoing
conversation about the past.
    Every generation must write its own history. Old conclusions—say,
about the motives of European explorers or the realities of life on slave
plantations—fall before new evidence and new outlooks. Names of




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
xP r ef ace


       l­eaders and dates of events may not change, but the weight we give them
        and the context with which we frame them invariably evolves. History is
        a conversation between the past and the present. To understand a global
        society, we must explore a history of transnational forces. To understand
        the lived experiences of ordinary Americans, we must look beyond the
        elites who framed older textbooks and listen to the poor and disadvan-
        taged from all generations.
            But why study history in the first place? History can cultivate essential
        and relevant—or, in more utilitarian terms, “marketable”—skills: careful
        reading, creative thinking, and clear communication. Many are familiar
        with a famous quote of philosopher George Santayana: “Those who fail
        to learn from history are doomed to repeat it.”2 The role of history in
       shaping current events is more complicated than this quote implies, but
       Santayana was right in arguing that history offers important lessons. The
       historical sensibility yields perspective and context and broader aware-
       ness. It liberates us from our narrow experiences and pulls us into, in the
       words of historian Peter Stearns, “the laboratory of human experience.”3
        Perhaps a better way to articulate the importance of studying history
        would be, “Those who fail to understand their history will fail to under-
        stand themselves.”
            Historical interpretation is never wholly subjective: it requires method,
        rigor, and perspective. The open nature of historical discourse does not
        mean that all arguments—and certainly not all “opinions”—about the
        past are equally valid. Some are simply wrong. And yet good historical
        questions will not always have easy answers. Asking “When did Chris-
        topher Columbus first sail across the Atlantic?” will tell us far less than
        “What inspired Columbus to attempt his voyage?” or “How did Native
        Americans interpret the arrival of Europeans?” Crafting answers to these
        questions reveals far greater insights into our history.
            But how can any textbook encapsulate American history? Should it
        organize around certain themes or surrender to the impossibility of syn-
        thesis and retreat toward generality? In the oft-cited lines of the Ameri-
        can poet Walt Whitman, we found as good an organizing principle as any
        other: “I too am not a bit tamed—I too am untranslatable,” he wrote,
        “I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.”4 Long before
       Whitman and long after, Americans have sung something collectively
       amid the deafening roar of their many individual voices. Here we find
       both chorus and cacophony together, as one. This textbook therefore
       offers the story of that barbaric, untranslatable American yawp by con-



 © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
          Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
P re f a c e  x i


structing a coherent and accessible narrative from all the best of recent
historical scholarship. Without losing sight of politics and power, it in-
corporates transnational perspectives, integrates diverse voices, recovers
narratives of resistance, and explores the complex process of cultural
creation. It looks for America in crowded slave cabins, bustling markets,
congested tenements, and marbled halls. It navigates between maternity
wards, prisons, streets, bars, and boardrooms. Whitman’s America, like
ours, cut across the narrow boundaries that can strangle narratives of
American history.
    We have produced The American Yawp to help guide students in
their encounter with American history. The American Yawp is a col-
laboratively built, open American history textbook designed for general
readers and college-level history courses. Over three hundred academic
historians—scholars and experienced college-level instructors—have
­
come together and freely volunteered their expertise to help democratize
the American past for twenty-first century readers. The project is freely
accessible online at www​.AmericanYawp​.com, and in addition to provid-
ing a peer review of the text, Stanford University Press has partnered with
The American Yawp to publish a print edition. Furthermore, The Ameri-
can Yawp remains an evolving, collaborative text: you are encouraged to
help us improve by offering comments on our feedback page, available
through AmericanYawp​.com.
   The American Yawp is a fully open resource: you are encouraged to
use it, download it, distribute it, and modify it as you see fit. The project
is formally operated under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike
4.0 International (CC-BY-SA) License and is designed to meet the stan-
dards of a “Free Cultural Work.” We are happy to share it and we hope
you will do the same.
                                      Joseph Locke & Ben Wright, editors

N o t e s t o p r e fac e
    1. William Faulkner, Requiem for a Nun (New York: Random House,
1954), 73.
    2. George Santayana, The Life of Reason: Or the Phases of Human Progress,
Volume I (New York: Scribner, 1905), 284.
    3. Peter N. Stearns, “Why Study History,” American Historical Associa-
tion (July 11, 2008). https://​www​.historians​.org/​about​-aha​-and​-membership/​aha​
-history​-and​-archives/​archives/​why​-study​-history​-​(1998.
    4. Walt Whitman, Leaves of Grass (Brooklyn: Rome, 1855), 55.




           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
           T h e A m e r i c a n Y aw p




© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
1
The New World

I. Introduction
Europeans called the Americas “the New World.” But for the millions of         Cahokia, as it may
                                                                               have appeared
Native Americans they encountered, it was anything but. Humans have            around 1150 CE.
lived in the Americas for over ten thousand years. Dynamic and diverse,        Painting by Mi-
                                                                               chael Hampshire
they spoke hundreds of languages and created thousands of distinct cul-
                                                                               for the Cahokia
tures. Native Americans built settled communities and followed seasonal        Mounds State
migration patterns, maintained peace through alliances and warred with         Historic Site.

their neighbors, and developed self-sufficient economies and maintained
vast trade networks. They cultivated distinct art forms and spiritual val-
ues. Kinship ties knit their communities together. But the arrival of Eu-
ropeans and the resulting global exchange of people, animals, plants,
and microbes—what scholars benignly call the Columbian Exchange—
bridged more than ten thousand years of geographic separation, inaugu-
rated centuries of violence, unleashed the greatest biological terror the
world had ever seen, and revolutionized the history of the world. It began
one of the most consequential developments in all of human history and
the first chapter in the long American yawp.


         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2                                                                         Chap ter 1



           II. The First Americans
           American history begins with the first Americans. But where do their
           stories start? Native Americans passed stories down through the millen-
           nia that tell of their creation and reveal the contours of indigenous belief.
           The Salinan people of present-day California, for example, tell of a bald
           eagle that formed the first man out of clay and the first woman out of
           a feather.1 According to a Lenape tradition, the earth was made when
           Sky Woman fell into a watery world and, with the help of muskrat and
           beaver, landed safely on a turtle’s back, thus creating Turtle Island, or
           North America. A Choctaw tradition locates southeastern peoples’ be-
           ginnings inside the great Mother Mound earthwork, Nunih Waya, in
           the lower Mississippi Valley.2 Nahua people trace their beginnings to the
           place of the Seven Caves, from which their ancestors emerged before
           they migrated to what is now central Mexico.3 America’s indigenous peo-
           ples have passed down many accounts of their origins, written and oral,
           which share creation and migration histories.
                Archaeologists and anthropologists, meanwhile, focus on migration
           histories. Studying artifacts, bones, and genetic signatures, these scholars
           have pieced together a narrative that claims that the Americas were once
           a “new world” for Native Americans as well.
                The last global ice age trapped much of the world’s water in enor-
           mous continental glaciers. Twenty thousand years ago, ice sheets, some
           a mile thick, extended across North America as far south as modern-day
           Illinois. With so much of the world’s water captured in these massive ice
           sheets, global sea levels were much lower, and a land bridge connected
           Asia and North America across the Bering Strait. Between twelve and
           twenty thousand years ago, Native ancestors crossed the ice, waters, and
           exposed lands between the continents of Asia and America. These mobile
           hunter-gatherers traveled in small bands, exploiting vegetable, animal,
           and marine resources into the Beringian tundra at the northwestern edge
           of North America. DNA evidence suggests that these ancestors paused—
           for perhaps fifteen thousand years—in the expansive region between Asia
           and America.4 Other ancestors crossed the seas and voyaged along the
           Pacific coast, traveling along riverways and settling where local ecosys-
           tems permitted.5 Glacial sheets receded around fourteen thousand years
           ago, opening a corridor to warmer climates and new resources. Some an-
           cestral communities migrated southward and eastward. Evidence found
           at Monte Verde, a site in modern-day Chile, suggests that human ac-
           tivity began there at least 14,500 years ago. Similar evidence hints at

     © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
              Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                              3


human settlement in the Florida panhandle at the same time.6 On many
points, archaeological and traditional knowledge sources converge: the
dental, archaeological, linguistic, oral, ecological, and genetic evidence il-
lustrates a great deal of diversity, with numerous groups settling and mi-
grating over thousands of years, potentially from many different points
of origin.7 Whether emerging from the earth, water, or sky; being made
by a creator; or migrating to their homelands, modern Native American
communities recount histories in America that date long before human
memory.
    In the Northwest, Native groups exploited the great salmon-filled riv-
ers. On the plains and prairie lands, hunting communities followed bison
                                                                                 Prehistoric settle-
herds and moved according to seasonal patterns. In mountains, prairies,          ment in Warren
deserts, and forests, the cultures and ways of life of paleo-era ancestors       County, Missis-
were as varied as the geography. These groups spoke hundreds of lan-             sippi. Mural by
                                                                                 Robert Dafford,
guages and adopted distinct cultural practices. Rich and diverse diets fu-       depicting the
eled massive population growth across the continent.                             Kings Crossing
                                                                                 archaeological
    Agriculture arose sometime between nine thousand and five thou-              site as it may have
sand years ago, almost simultaneously in the Eastern and Western Hemi-           appeared in
                                                                                 1000 CE. Vicks-
spheres. Mesoamericans in modern-day Mexico and Central America                  burg Riverfront
relied on domesticated maize (corn) to develop the hemisphere’s first            Murals.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4                                                                          Chap ter 1


           settled population around 1200 BCE.8 Corn was high in caloric content,
           easily dried and stored, and, in Mesoamerica’s warm and fertile Gulf
           Coast, could sometimes be harvested twice in a year. Corn—as well as
           other Mesoamerican crops—spread across North America and contin-
           ues to hold an important spiritual and cultural place in many Native
           communities.
               Agriculture flourished in the fertile river valleys between the Mississippi
           River and the Atlantic Ocean, an area known as the Eastern Woodlands.
           There, three crops in particular—corn, beans, and squash, known as the
           Three Sisters—provided nutritional needs necessary to sustain cities and
           civilizations. In Woodland areas from the Great Lakes and the Mississippi
           River to the Atlantic coast, Native communities managed their forest re-
           sources by burning underbrush to create vast parklike hunting grounds and
           to clear the ground for planting the Three Sisters. Many groups used shift-
           ing cultivation, in which farmers cut the forest, burned the undergrowth,
           and then planted seeds in the nutrient-rich ashes. When crop yields began
           to decline, farmers moved to another field and allowed the land to recover
           and the forest to regrow before again cutting the forest, burning the under-
           growth, and restarting the cycle. This technique was particularly useful in
           areas with difficult soil. But in the fertile regions of the Eastern Woodlands,
           Native American farmers engaged in permanent, intensive agriculture,
           using hand tools rather than European-style plows. The rich soil and use
           of hand tools enabled effective and sustainable farming practices, produc-
           ing high yields without overburdening the soil.9 Typically in Woodland
           communities, women practiced agriculture while men hunted and fished.
               Agriculture allowed for dramatic social change, but for some, it also
           may have accompanied a decline in health. Analysis of remains reveals
           that societies transitioning to agriculture often experienced weaker bones
           and teeth.10 But despite these possible declines, agriculture brought im-
           portant benefits. Farmers could produce more food than hunters, en-
           abling some members of the community to pursue other skills. Religious
           leaders, skilled soldiers, and artists could devote their energy to activities
           other than food production.
               North America’s indigenous peoples shared some broad traits. Spiri-
           tual practices, understandings of property, and kinship networks differed
           markedly from European arrangements. Most Native Americans did not
           neatly distinguish between the natural and the supernatural. Spiritual
           power permeated their world and was both tangible and accessible. It
           could be appealed to and harnessed. Kinship bound most Native North



     © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
              Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                 5


American people together. Most peoples lived in small communities tied
by kinship networks. Many Native cultures understood ancestry as matri-
lineal: family and clan identity proceeded along the female line, through
mothers and daughters, rather than fathers and sons. Fathers, for in-
stance, often joined mothers’ extended families, and sometimes even a
mother’s brothers took a more direct role in child-raising than biological
fathers. Therefore, mothers often wielded enormous influence at local
levels, and men’s identities and influence often depended on their relation-
ships to women. Native American culture, meanwhile, generally afforded
greater sexual and marital freedom than European cultures. Women, for
instance, often chose their husbands, and divorce often was a relatively
simple and straightforward process. Moreover, most Native peoples’ no-
tions of property rights differed markedly from those of Europeans. Na-
tive Americans generally felt a personal ownership of tools, weapons, or
other items that were actively used, and this same rule applied to land
and crops. Groups and individuals exploited particular pieces of land and
used violence or negotiation to exclude others. But the right to the use of
land did not imply the right to its permanent possession.
    Native Americans had many ways of communicating, including
graphic ones, and some of these artistic and communicative technologies
are still used today. For example, Algonquian-speaking Ojibwes used
birch-bark scrolls to record medical treatments, recipes, songs, stories,
and more. Other Eastern Woodland peoples wove plant fibers, embroi-
dered skins with porcupine quills, and modeled the earth to make sites
of complex ceremonial meaning. On the Plains, artisans wove buffalo
hair and painted on buffalo skins; in the Pacific Northwest weavers wove
goat hair into soft textiles with particular patterns. Maya, Zapotec, and
Nahua ancestors in Mesoamerica painted their histories on plant-derived
textiles and carved them into stone. In the Andes, Inca recorders noted
information in the form of knotted strings, or khipu.11
    Two thousand years ago, some of the largest culture groups in North
America were the Puebloan groups, centered in the current-day Greater
Southwest (the southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico),
the Mississippian groups located along the Great River and its tributar-
ies, and the Mesoamerican groups of the areas now known as central
Mexico and the Yucatán. Previous developments in agricultural technol-
ogy enabled the explosive growth of the large early societies, such as that
at Tenochtitlán in the Valley of Mexico, Cahokia along the Mississippi
River, and in the desert oasis areas of the Greater Southwest.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
6                                                                                   Chap ter 1




Native peoples           Chaco Canyon in northern New Mexico was home to ancestral
in the Southwest
began construct-
                     Puebloan peoples between 900 and 1300 CE. As many as fifteen thou-
ing these highly     sand individuals lived in the Chaco Canyon complex in present-day New
defensible cliff     Mexico.12 Sophisticated agricultural practices, extensive trading net-
dwellings in 1190
CE and continued     works, and even the domestication of animals like turkeys allowed the
expanding and        population to swell. Massive residential structures, built from sandstone
refurbishing them
until 1260 CE        blocks and lumber carried across great distances, housed hundreds of
before abandon-      Puebloan people. One building, Pueblo Bonito, stretched over two acres
ing them around
1300 CE. Andreas
                     and rose five stories. Its six hundred rooms were decorated with copper
F. Borchert, Mesa    bells, turquoise decorations, and bright macaws.13 Homes like those at
Verde National       Pueblo Bonito included a small dugout room, or kiva, which played an
Park Cliff Palace.
Wikimedia. Cre-      important role in a variety of ceremonies and served as an important cen-
ative Commons        ter for Puebloan life and culture. Puebloan spirituality was tied both to
Attribution-
Share Alike 3.0      the earth and the heavens, as generations carefully charted the stars and
Germany.             designed homes in line with the path of the sun and moon.14
                         The Puebloan people of Chaco Canyon faced several ecological chal-
                     lenges, including deforestation and overirrigation, which ultimately
                     caused the community to collapse and its people to disperse to smaller
                     settlements. An extreme fifty-year drought began in 1130. Shortly there-
                     after, Chaco Canyon was deserted. New groups, including the Apache
                     and Navajo, entered the vacated territory and adopted several Puebloan
                     customs. The same drought that plagued the Pueblo also likely affected
                     the Mississippian peoples of the American Midwest and South. The Mis-
                     sissippians developed one of the largest civilizations north of modern-
                     day Mexico. Roughly one thousand years ago, the largest Mississippian
                     settlement, Cahokia, located just east of modern-day St. Louis, peaked
                     at a population of between ten thousand and thirty thousand. It rivaled
                     contemporary European cities in size. No American city, in fact, would

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                             7


match Cahokia’s peak population levels until after the American Revolu-
tion. The city itself spanned two thousand acres and centered on Monks
Mound, a large earthen hill that rose ten stories and was larger at its base
than the pyramids of Egypt. As with many of the peoples who lived in
the Woodlands, life and death in Cahokia were linked to the movement
of the stars, sun, and moon, and their ceremonial earthwork structures
reflect these important structuring forces.
    Cahokia was politically organized around chiefdoms, a hierarchical,
clan-based system that gave leaders both secular and sacred authority.
The size of the city and the extent of its influence suggest that the city
relied on a number of lesser chiefdoms under the authority of a para-
mount leader. Social stratification was partly preserved through frequent
warfare. War captives were enslaved, and these captives formed an im-           An artist’s render-
portant part of the economy in the North American Southeast. Native             ing of Cahokia
                                                                                as it may have
American slavery was not based on holding people as property. Instead,          appeared in 1150
Native Americans understood slaves as people who lacked kinship net-            CE. Prepared by
                                                                                Bill Isminger and
works. Slavery, then, was not always a permanent condition. Very often,         Mark Esarey with
a former slave could become a fully integrated member of the commu-             artwork by Greg
                                                                                Harlin. From the
nity. Adoption or marriage could enable a slave to enter a kinship net-         Cahokia Mounds
work and join the community. Slavery and captive trading became an              State Historic Site.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
8                                                                         Chap ter 1


           important way that many Native communities regrew and gained or
           maintained power.
               Around 1050, Cahokia experienced what one archaeologist has
           called a “big bang,” which included “a virtually instantaneous and per-
           vasive shift in all things political, social, and ideological.”15 The popula-
           tion grew almost 500 percent in only one generation, and new people
           groups were absorbed into the city and its supporting communities. By
           1300, the once-powerful city had undergone a series of strains that led
           to collapse. Scholars previously pointed to ecological disaster or slow
           depopulation through emigration, but new research instead emphasizes
           mounting warfare, or internal political tensions. Environmental explana-
           tions suggest that population growth placed too great a burden on the ar-
           able land. Others suggest that the demand for fuel and building materials
           led to deforestation, erosion, and perhaps an extended drought. Recent
           evidence, including defensive stockades, suggests that political turmoil
           among the ruling elite and threats from external enemies may explain the
           end of the once-great civilization.16
               North American communities were connected by kin, politics, and
           culture and sustained by long-distance trading routes. The Mississippi
           River served as an important trade artery, but all of the continent’s
           waterways were vital to transportation and communication. Cahokia
           became a key trading center partly because of its position near the Mis-
           sissippi, Illinois, and Missouri Rivers. These rivers created networks that
           stretched from the Great Lakes to the American Southeast. Archaeolo-
           gists can identify materials, like seashells, that traveled over a thousand
           miles to reach the center of this civilization. At least 3,500 years ago, the
           community at what is now Poverty Point, Louisiana, had access to cop-
           per from present-day Canada and flint from modern-day Indiana. Sheets
           of mica found at the sacred Serpent Mound site near the Ohio River came
           from the Allegheny Mountains, and obsidian from nearby earthworks
           came from Mexico. Turquoise from the Greater Southwest was used at
           Teotihuacan 1200 years ago.
               In the Eastern Woodlands, many Native American societies lived in
           smaller, dispersed communities to take advantage of rich soils and abun-
           dant rivers and streams. The Lenapes, also known as Delawares, farmed
           the bottomlands throughout the Hudson and Delaware River watersheds
           in New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware. Their hun-
           dreds of settlements, stretching from southern Massachusetts through
           Delaware, were loosely bound together by political, social, and spiritual
           connections.

     © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
              Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                 9


     Dispersed and relatively independent, Lenape communities were
bound together by oral histories, ceremonial traditions, consensus-
based political organization, kinship networks, and a shared clan sys-
tem. Kinship tied the various Lenape communities and clans together,
and society was organized along matrilineal lines. Marriage occurred
between clans, and a married man joined the clan of his wife. Lenape
women wielded authority over marriages, households, and agricultural
production and may even have played a significant part in determin-
ing the selection of leaders, called sachems. Dispersed authority, small
settlements, and kin-based organization contributed to the long-lasting
stability and resilience of Lenape communities.17 One or more sachems
governed Lenape communities by the consent of their people. Lenape
sachems acquired their authority by demonstrating wisdom and expe-
rience. This differed from the hierarchical organization of many Mis-
sissippian cultures. Large gatherings did exist, however, as dispersed
communities and their leaders gathered for ceremonial purposes or to
make big decisions. Sachems spoke for their people in larger councils
that included men, women, and elders. The Lenapes experienced oc-
casional tensions with other indigenous groups like the Iroquois to the
north or the Susquehannock to the south, but the lack of defensive for-
tifications near Lenape communities convinced archaeologists that the
Lenapes avoided large-scale warfare.
     The continued longevity of Lenape societies, which began centuries
before European contact, was also due to their skills as farmers and
fishers. Along with the Three Sisters, Lenape women planted tobacco,
sunflowers, and gourds. They harvested fruits and nuts from trees and
cultivated numerous medicinal plants, which they used with great pro-
ficiency. The Lenapes organized their communities to take advantage of
growing seasons and the migration patterns of animals and fowl that
were a part of their diet. During planting and harvesting seasons, Le-
napes gathered in larger groups to coordinate their labor and take ad-
vantage of local abundance. As proficient fishers, they organized seasonal
fish camps to net shellfish and catch shad. Lenapes wove nets, baskets,
mats, and a variety of household materials from the rushes found along
the streams, rivers, and coasts. They made their homes in some of the
most fertile and abundant lands in the Eastern Woodlands and used their
skills to create a stable and prosperous civilization. The first Dutch and
Swedish settlers who encountered the Lenapes in the seventeenth century
recognized Lenape prosperity and quickly sought their friendship. Their
lives came to depend on it.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
10                                                                         Chap ter 1


                 In the Pacific Northwest, the Kwakwaka’wakw, Tlingits, Haidas, and
            hundreds of other peoples, speaking dozens of languages, thrived in a
            land with a moderate climate, lush forests, and many rivers. The peoples
            of this region depended on salmon for survival and valued it accord-
            ingly. Images of salmon decorated totem poles, baskets, canoes, oars,
            and other tools. The fish was treated with spiritual respect and its image
            represented prosperity, life, and renewal. Sustainable harvesting practices
            ensured the survival of salmon populations. The Coast Salish people and
            several others celebrated the First Salmon Ceremony when the first mi-
            grating salmon was spotted each season. Elders closely observed the size
            of the salmon run and delayed harvesting to ensure that a sufficient num-
            ber survived to spawn and return in the future.18 Men commonly used
            nets, hooks, and other small tools to capture salmon as they migrated
            upriver to spawn. Massive cedar canoes, as long as fifty feet and carry-
            ing as many as twenty men, also enabled extensive fishing expeditions in
            the Pacific Ocean, where skilled fishermen caught halibut, sturgeon, and
            other fish, sometimes hauling thousands of pounds in a single canoe.19
                 Food surpluses enabled significant population growth, and the Pa-
            cific Northwest became one of the most densely populated regions of
            North America. The combination of population density and surplus food
            created a unique social organization centered on elaborate feasts, called
            potlatches. These potlatches celebrated births and weddings and deter-
            mined social status. The party lasted for days and hosts demonstrated
            their wealth and power by entertaining guests with food, artwork, and
            performances. The more the hosts gave away, the more prestige and
            power they had within the group. Some men saved for decades to host
            an extravagant potlatch that would in turn give him greater respect and
            power within the community.
                 Many peoples of the Pacific Northwest built elaborate plank houses
            out of the region’s abundant cedar trees. The five-hundred-foot-long
            Suquamish Oleman House (or Old Man House), for instance, rested
            on the banks of Puget Sound.20 Giant cedar trees were also carved and
            painted in the shape of animals or other figures to tell stories and ex-
            press identities. These totem poles became the most recognizable artistic
            form of the Pacific Northwest, but peoples also carved masks and other
            wooden items, such as hand drums and rattles, out of the region’s great
            trees.
                 Despite commonalities, Native cultures varied greatly. The New
            World was marked by diversity and contrast. By the time Europeans were
            poised to cross the Atlantic, Native Americans spoke hundreds of lan-

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                          11




guages and lived in keeping with the hemisphere’s many climates. Some           Intricately carved
                                                                                masks, like the
lived in cities, others in small bands. Some migrated seasonally; others        Crooked Beak of
settled permanently. All Native peoples had long histories and well-            Heaven Mask,
formed, unique cultures that developed over millennia. But the arrival of       used natural
                                                                                elements such as
Europeans changed everything.                                                   animals to repre-
                                                                                sent supernatural
                                                                                forces during cer-
III. European Expansion                                                         emonial dances
                                                                                and festivals.
                                                                                Nineteenth-
Scandinavian seafarers reached the New World long before Columbus.              century brooked
At their peak they sailed as far east as Constantinople and raided settle-      beak of heaven
ments as far south as North Africa. They established limited colonies in        mask from the
                                                                                Kwakwaka’wakw.
Iceland and Greenland and, around the year 1000, Leif Erikson reached           Wikimedia. Cre-
Newfoundland in present-day Canada. But the Norse colony failed. Cul-           ative Commons
                                                                                Attribution 3.0
turally and geographically isolated, the Norse were driven back to the          Unported.
sea by some combination of limited resources, inhospitable weather, food
shortages, and Native resistance.
    Then, centuries before Columbus, the Crusades linked Europe with
the wealth, power, and knowledge of Asia. Europeans rediscovered or
adopted Greek, Roman, and Muslim knowledge. The hemispheric dis-
semination of goods and knowledge not only sparked the Renaissance

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
12                                                                         Chap ter 1


            but fueled long-term European expansion. Asian goods flooded European
            markets, creating a demand for new commodities. This trade created vast
            new wealth, and Europeans battled one another for trade supremacy.
                European nation-states consolidated under the authority of powerful
            kings. A series of military conflicts between England and France—the
            Hundred Years’ War—accelerated nationalism and cultivated the finan-
            cial and military administration necessary to maintain nation-states. In
            Spain, the marriage of Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile con-
            solidated the two most powerful kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula. The
            Crusades had never ended in Iberia: the Spanish crown concluded cen-
            turies of intermittent warfare—the Reconquista—by expelling Muslim
            Moors and Iberian Jews from the Iberian peninsula in 1492, just as Chris-
            topher Columbus sailed west. With new power, these new nations—and
            their newly empowered monarchs—yearned to access the wealth of Asia.
                Seafaring Italian traders commanded the Mediterranean and con-
            trolled trade with Asia. Spain and Portugal, at the edges of Europe, relied
            on middlemen and paid higher prices for Asian goods. They sought a
            more direct route. And so they looked to the Atlantic. Portugal invested
            heavily in exploration. From his estate on the Sagres Peninsula of Portu-
            gal, a rich sailing port, Prince Henry the Navigator (Infante Henry, Duke
            of Viseu) invested in research and technology and underwrote many
            technological breakthroughs. His investments bore fruit. In the fifteenth
            century, Portuguese sailors perfected the astrolabe, a tool to calculate lat-
            itude, and the caravel, a ship well suited for ocean exploration. Both were
            technological breakthroughs. The astrolabe allowed for precise naviga-
            tion, and the caravel, unlike more common vessels designed for trading
            on the relatively placid Mediterranean, was a rugged ship with a deep
            draft capable of making lengthy voyages on the open ocean and, equally
            important, carrying large amounts of cargo while doing so.
                Blending economic and religious motivations, the Portuguese estab-
            lished forts along the Atlantic coast of Africa during the fifteenth century,
            inaugurating centuries of European colonization there. Portuguese trad-
            ing posts generated new profits that funded further trade and further
            colonization. Trading posts spread across the vast coastline of Africa,
            and by the end of the fifteenth century, Vasco da Gama leapfrogged his
            way around the coasts of Africa to reach India and other lucrative Asian
            markets.
                The vagaries of ocean currents and the limits of contemporary tech-
            nology forced Iberian sailors to sail west into the open sea before cutting
            back east to Africa. So doing, the Spanish and Portuguese stumbled on

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                         13




several islands off the coast of Europe and Africa, including the Azores,       Engraving of
                                                                                sixteenth-century
the Canary Islands, and the Cape Verde Islands. They became training            Lisbon from
grounds for the later colonization of the Americas and saw the first large-     Civitatis Orbis
scale cultivation of sugar by enslaved laborers.                                Terrarum, The
                                                                                Cities of the
    Sugar was originally grown in Asia but became a popular, widely             World, ed. Georg
profitable luxury item consumed by the nobility of Europe. The Portu-           Braun (Cologne:
                                                                                1572). Wikimedia.
guese began growing sugarcane along the Mediterranean, but sugar was
a difficult crop. It required tropical temperatures, daily rainfall, unique
soil conditions, and a fourteen-month growing season. But on the At-
lantic islands, the Portuguese had found new land to support sugar pro-
duction. New patterns of human and ecological destruction followed.
Isolated from the mainlands of Europe and Africa for millennia, island
natives—known as the Guanches—were enslaved or perished soon after
Europeans arrived. Portugal’s would-be planters needed laborers to cul-
tivate the difficult, labor-intensive crop. Portuguese merchants, who had
recently established good relations with powerful African kingdoms such
as Kongo, Ndongo, and Songhai, looked then to African slaves. Slav-
ery had long existed among African societies. African leaders traded war
captives—who by custom forfeited their freedom in battle—for Portu-
guese guns, iron, and manufactured goods. From bases along the Atlantic
coast, the largest in modern-day Nigeria, the Portuguese began purchas-
ing slaves for export to the Atlantic islands to work the sugar fields. Thus
were born the first great Atlantic plantations.
    Spain, too, stood on the cutting edge of maritime technology. Span-
ish sailors had become masters of the caravels. As Portugal consolidated
control over African trading networks and the circuitous eastbound sea
route to Asia, Spain yearned for its own path to empire. Christopher

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
14                                                                                           Chap ter 1




By the fifteenth century, the Portuguese had established forts and colonies on islands and along the rim of
the Atlantic Ocean; other major European countries soon followed. An anonymous cartographer created
this map known as the Cantino Map, the earliest known map of European exploration in the New World,
to depict these holdings and argue for the greatness of his native Portugal. Cantino planisphere (1502),
Biblioteca Estense, Modena, Italy. Wikimedia.


                       ­ olumbus, a skilled Italian-born sailor who had studied under Portu-
                       C
                       guese navigators, promised just that opportunity.
                           Educated Asians and Europeans of the fifteenth century knew the
                       world was round. They also knew that while it was therefore technically
                       possible to reach Asia by sailing west from Europe—thereby avoiding
                       Italian or Portuguese middlemen—the earth’s vast size would doom even
                       the greatest caravels to starvation and thirst long before they ever reached
                       their destination. But Columbus underestimated the size of the globe by a
                       full two thirds and therefore believed it was possible. After unsuccessfully
                       shopping his proposed expedition in several European courts, he con-
                       vinced Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand of Spain to provide him three
                       small ships, which set sail in 1492. Columbus was both confoundingly
                       wrong about the size of the earth and spectacularly lucky that two large
                       continents lurked in his path. On October 12, 1492, after two months at
                       sea, the Niña, Pinta, and Santa María and their ninety men landed in the
                       modern-day Bahamas.
                           The indigenous Arawaks, or Taíno, populated the Caribbean islands.
                       They fished and grew corn, yams, and cassava. Columbus described them
                       as innocents. “They are very gentle and without knowledge of what is
                       evil; nor the sins of murder or theft,” he reported to the Spanish crown.
                       “Your highness may believe that in all the world there can be no better
                       people. . . . They love their neighbors as themselves, and their speech is

                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                 15


the sweetest and gentlest in the world, and always with a smile.” But Co-
lumbus had come for wealth and he could find little. The Arawaks, how-
ever, wore small gold ornaments. Columbus left thirty-nine Spaniards at
a military fort on Hispaniola to find and secure the source of the gold
while he returned to Spain, with a dozen captured and branded Arawaks.
Columbus arrived to great acclaim and quickly worked to outfit a return
voyage. Spain’s New World motives were clear from the beginning. If
outfitted for a return voyage, Columbus promised the Spanish crown
gold and slaves. Columbus reported, “With fifty men they can all be sub-
jugated and made to do what is required of them.”21
    Columbus was outfitted with seventeen ships and over one thousand
men to return to the West Indies (Columbus made four voyages to the
New World). Still believing he had landed in the East Indies, he promised
to reward Isabella and Ferdinand’s investment. But when material wealth
proved slow in coming, the Spanish embarked on a vicious campaign to
extract every possible ounce of wealth from the Caribbean. The Spanish
decimated the Arawaks. Bartolomé de Las Casas traveled to the New
World in 1502 and later wrote, “I saw with these Eyes of mine the Span-
iards for no other reason, but only to gratify their bloody mindedness,
cut off the Hands, Noses, and Ears, both of Indians and Indianesses.”22
When the enslaved Indians exhausted the islands’ meager gold reserves,
the Spaniards forced them to labor on their huge new estates, the enco-
miendas. Las Casas described European barbarities in cruel detail. By
presuming the natives had no humanity, the Spaniards utterly abandoned
theirs. Casual violence and dehumanizing exploitation ravaged the Ar-
awaks. The Indian population collapsed. Within a few generations the
whole island of Hispaniola had been depopulated and a whole people
exterminated. Historians’ estimates of the island’s pre-contact popula-
tion range from fewer than one million to as many as eight million (Las
Casas estimated it at three million). In a few short years, they were gone.
“Who in future generations will believe this?” Las Casas wondered. “I
myself writing it as a knowledgeable eyewitness can hardly believe it.”
    Despite the diversity of Native populations and the existence of sev-
eral strong empires, Native Americans were wholly unprepared for the
arrival of Europeans. Biology magnified European cruelties. Cut off from
the Old World, its domesticated animals, and its immunological his-
tory, Native Americans lived free from the terrible diseases that ravaged
populations in Asia, Europe and Africa. But their blessing now became
a curse. Native Americans lacked the immunities that Europeans and
Africans had developed over centuries of deadly epidemics, and so when

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
16                                                                         Chap ter 1


            Europeans arrived, carrying smallpox, typhus, influenza, diphtheria,
            measles, and hepatitis, plagues decimated Native communities.23 Many
            died in war and slavery, but millions died in epidemics. All told, in fact,
            some scholars estimate that as much as 90 percent of the population of
            the Americas perished within the first century and a half of European
            contact.24
                Though ravaged by disease and warfare, Native Americans forged
            middle grounds, resisted with violence, accommodated and adapted to
            the challenges of colonialism, and continued to shape the patterns of life
            throughout the New World for hundreds of years. But the Europeans
            kept coming.


            IV. Spanish Exploration and Conquest
            As news of the Spanish conquest spread, wealth-hungry Spaniards poured
            into the New World seeking land, gold, and titles. A New World empire
            spread from Spain’s Caribbean foothold. Motives were plain: said one
            soldier, “we came here to serve God and the king, and also to get rich.”25
            Mercenaries joined the conquest and raced to capture the human and
            material wealth of the New World.
                The Spanish managed labor relations through a legal system known
            as the encomienda, an exploitive feudal arrangement in which Spain tied
            Indian laborers to vast estates. In the encomienda, the Spanish crown
            granted a person not only land but a specified number of natives as well.
            Encomenderos brutalized their laborers. After Bartolomé de Las Casas
            published his incendiary account of Spanish abuses (The Destruction of
            the Indies), Spanish authorities abolished the encomienda in 1542 and
            replaced it with the repartimiento. Intended as a milder system, the repar-
            timiento nevertheless replicated many of the abuses of the older system,
            and the rapacious exploitation of the Native population continued as
            Spain spread its empire over the Americas.
                As Spain’s New World empire expanded, Spanish conquerors met the
            massive empires of Central and South America, civilizations that dwarfed
            anything found in North America. In Central America the Maya built
            massive temples, sustained large populations, and constructed a complex
            and long-lasting civilization with a written language, advanced mathemat-
            ics, and stunningly accurate calendars. But Maya civilization, although
            it had not disappeared, nevertheless collapsed before European arrival,
            likely because of droughts and unsustainable agricultural practices. But



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                           17




the eclipse of the Maya only heralded the later rise of the most powerful       El Castillo (pyra-
                                                                                mid of Kukulcán)
Native civilization ever seen in the Western Hemisphere: the Aztecs.            in Chichén Itzá.
    Militaristic migrants from northern Mexico, the Aztecs moved south          Photograph by
into the Valley of Mexico, conquered their way to dominance, and built          Daniel Schwen.
                                                                                Wikimedia. Cre-
the largest empire in the New World. When the Spaniards arrived in              ative Commons
Mexico they found a sprawling civilization centered around Tenochti-            Attribution-
                                                                                Share Alike 4.0
tlán, an awe-inspiring city built on a series of natural and man-made           International.
islands in the middle of Lake Texcoco, located today within modern-day
Mexico City. Tenochtitlán, founded in 1325, rivaled the world’s largest
cities in size and grandeur. Much of the city was built on large artificial
islands called chinampas, which the Aztecs constructed by dredging mud
and rich sediment from the bottom of the lake and depositing it over time
to form new landscapes. A massive pyramid temple, the Templo Mayor,
was located at the city center (its ruins can still be found in the center of
Mexico City). When the Spaniards arrived, they could scarcely believe
what they saw: 70,000 buildings, housing perhaps 200,000–250,000
people, all built on a lake and connected by causeways and canals. Ber-
nal Díaz del Castillo, a Spanish soldier, later recalled, “When we saw so
many cities and villages built in the water and other great towns on dry
land, we were amazed and said that it was like the enchantments. . . .
Some of our soldiers even asked whether the things that we saw were not
a dream? . . . I do not know how to describe it, seeing things as we did
that had never been heard of or seen before, not even dreamed about.”26



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
18                                                                                    Chap ter 1


                           From their island city the Aztecs dominated an enormous swath of
                       central and southern Mesoamerica. They ruled their empire through
                       a decentralized network of subject peoples that paid regular tribute—­
                       including everything from the most basic items, such as corn, beans, and
                       other foodstuffs, to luxury goods such as jade, cacao, and gold—and
                       provided troops for the empire. But unrest festered beneath the Aztecs’
                       imperial power, and European conquerors lusted after its vast wealth.
                           Hernán Cortés, an ambitious, thirty-four-year-old Spaniard who had
                       won riches in the conquest of Cuba, organized an invasion of Mexico in
                       1519. Sailing with six hundred men, horses, and cannon, he landed on the
                       coast of Mexico. Relying on a Native translator, whom he called Doña
                       Marina, and whom Mexican folklore denounces as La Malinche, Cortés
                       gathered information and allies in preparation for conquest. Through
                       intrigue, brutality, and the exploitation of endemic political divisions, he
                       enlisted the aid of thousands of Native allies, defeated Spanish rivals, and
This sixteenth-        marched on Tenochtitlán.
century map
of Tenochtit-              Aztec dominance rested on fragile foundations and many of the re-
lán shows the          gion’s semi-independent city-states yearned to break from Aztec rule.
aesthetic beauty
and advanced in-       Nearby kingdoms, including the Tarascans to the north and the remains
frastructure of this   of Maya city-states on the Yucatán peninsula, chafed at Aztec power.
great Aztec city.
Map, c. 1524.
                           Through persuasion, and maybe because some Aztecs thought Cor-
Wikimedia.             tés was the god Quetzalcoatl, the Spaniards entered Tenochtitlán peace-




                 © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                          Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                                     19


fully. Cortés then captured the emperor Montezuma and used him to
gain control of the Aztecs’ gold and silver reserves and their network of
mines. Eventually, the Aztecs revolted. Montezuma was branded a trai-
tor, and uprising ignited the city. Montezuma was killed along with a
third of Cortés’s men in la noche triste, the “night of sorrows.” The Span-
ish fought through thousands of indigenous insurgents and across canals
to flee the city, where they regrouped, enlisted more Native allies, cap-
tured Spanish reinforcements, and, in 1521, besieged the island city. The
Spaniards’ eighty-five-day siege cut off food and fresh water. Smallpox
ravaged the city. One Spanish observer said it “spread over the people as
great destruction. Some it covered on all parts—their faces, their heads,
their breasts, and so on. There was great havoc. Very many died of it. . . .
They could not move; they could not stir.”27 Cortés, the Spaniards, and




The Spanish relied on indigenous allies to defeat the Aztecs. The Tlaxcala were among the most important
Spanish allies in their conquest. This nineteenth-century re-creation of a sixteenth-century drawing depicts
Tlaxcalan warriors fighting alongside Spanish soldiers against the Aztecs. Wikimedia.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
20                                                                         Chap ter 1


            their Native allies then sacked the city. The temples were plundered and
            fifteen thousand died. After two years of conflict, a million-person-strong
            empire was toppled by disease, dissension, and a thousand European
            conquerors.
                 Farther south, along the Andes Mountains in South America, the
            Quechuas, or Incas, managed a vast mountain empire. From their capital
            of Cuzco in the Andean highlands, through conquest and negotiation,
            the Incas built an empire that stretched around the western half of the
            South American continent from present day Ecuador to central Chile and
            Argentina. They cut terraces into the sides of mountains to farm fertile
            soil, and by the 1400s they managed a thousand miles of Andean roads
            that tied together perhaps twelve million people. But like the Aztecs, un-
            rest between the Incas and conquered groups created tensions and left
            the empire vulnerable to invaders. Smallpox spread in advance of Span-
            ish conquerors and hit the Incan empire in 1525. Epidemics ravaged the
            population, cutting the empire’s population in half and killing the Incan
            emperor Huayna Capac and many members of his family. A bloody war
            of succession ensued. Inspired by Cortés’s conquest of Mexico, Francisco
            Pizarro moved south and found an empire torn by chaos. With 168 men,
            he deceived Incan rulers and took control of the empire and seized the
            capital city, Cuzco, in 1533. Disease, conquest, and slavery ravaged the
            remnants of the Incan empire.
                 After the conquests of Mexico and Peru, Spain settled into their new
            empire. A vast administrative hierarchy governed the new holdings:
            royal appointees oversaw an enormous territory of landed estates, and
            Indian laborers and administrators regulated the extraction of gold and
            silver and oversaw their transport across the Atlantic in Spanish galleons.
            Meanwhile Spanish migrants poured into the New World. During the
            sixteenth century alone, 225,000 migrated, and 750,000 came during the
            entire three centuries of Spanish colonial rule. Spaniards, often single,
            young, and male, emigrated for the various promises of land, wealth,
            and social advancement. Laborers, craftsmen, soldiers, clerks, and priests
            all crossed the Atlantic in large numbers. Indians, however, always out-
            numbered the Spanish, and the Spaniards, by both necessity and design,
            incorporated Native Americans into colonial life. This incorporation did
            not mean equality, however.
                 An elaborate racial hierarchy marked Spanish life in the New World.
            Regularized in the mid-1600s but rooted in medieval practices, the
            Sistema de Castas organized individuals into various racial groups based
            on their supposed “purity of blood.” Elaborate classifications became

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                               21




                                                     Casta paintings illustrated the varying degrees of
                                                     intermixture between colonial subjects, defining
                                                     them for Spanish officials. Unknown artist, Las
                                                     Castas, Museo Nacional del Virreinato, Tepot-
                                                     zotlan, Mexico. Wikimedia.



almost prerequisites for social and political advancement in Spanish colo-
nial society. Peninsulares—Iberian-born Spaniards, or españoles—occu-
pied the highest levels of administration and acquired the greatest estates.
Their descendants, New World-born Spaniards, or criollos, occupied
the next rung and rivaled the peninsulares for wealth and opportunity.
Mestizos—a term used to describe those of mixed Spanish and Indian
heritage—followed.
    Like the French later in North America, the Spanish tolerated and
sometimes even supported interracial marriage. There were simply too
few Spanish women in the New World to support the natural growth
of a purely Spanish population. The Catholic Church endorsed inter-
racial marriage as a moral bulwark against bastardy and rape. By 1600,
mestizos made up a large portion of the colonial population.28 By the
early 1700s, more than one third of all marriages bridged the Spanish-
Indian divide. Separated by wealth and influence from the peninsulares
and criollos, mestizos typically occupied a middling social position in
Spanish New World society. They were not quite Indios, or Indians, but
their lack of limpieza de sangre, or “pure blood,” removed them from the
privileges of full-blooded Spaniards. Spanish fathers of sufficient wealth

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
22                                                                                       Chap ter 1


                      and influence might shield their mestizo children from racial prejudice,
                      and a number of wealthy mestizos married españoles to “whiten” their
                      family lines, but more often mestizos were confined to a middle station
                      in the Spanish New World. Slaves and Indians occupied the lowest rungs
                      of the social ladder.
                          Many manipulated the Sistema de Casas to gain advantages for them-
                      selves and their children. Mestizo mothers, for instance, might insist that
                      their mestizo daughters were actually castizas, or quarter-Indians, who,
                      if they married a Spaniard, could, in the eyes of the law, produce “pure”
                      criollo children entitled to the full rights and opportunities of Spanish cit-
                      izens. But “passing” was an option only for the few. Instead, the massive
                      Native populations within Spain’s New World Empire ensured a level of
                      cultural and racial mixture—or mestizaje—unparalleled in British North
                      America. Spanish North America wrought a hybrid culture that was nei-
                      ther fully Spanish nor fully Indian. The Spanish not only built Mexico
                      City atop Tenochtitlán, but food, language, and families were also con-
                      structed on indigenous foundations. In 1531, a poor Indian named Juan
                      Diego reported that he was visited by the Virgin Mary, who came as




Our Lady of Guadalupe is perhaps the most culturally important and extensively reproduced Mexican-
Catholic image. In the iconic depiction, Mary stands atop the tilma (peasant cloak) of Juan Diego, on
which according to his story appeared the image of the Virgin of Guadalupe. Throughout Mexican history,
the story and image of Our Lady of Guadalupe has been a unifying national symbol. Mexican retablo of
Our Lady of Guadalupe, nineteenth century, in El Paso Museum of Art. Wikimedia.



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                 23


a dark-skinned Nahuatl-speaking Indian.29 Reports of miracles spread
across Mexico and the Virgen de Guadalupe became a national icon for
a new mestizo society.
    From Mexico, Spain expanded northward. Lured by the promises
of gold and another Tenochtitlán, Spanish expeditions scoured North
America for another wealthy Indian empire. Huge expeditions, resem-
bling vast moving communities, composed of hundreds of soldiers, set-
tlers, priests, and slaves, with enormous numbers of livestock, moved
across the continent. Juan Ponce de León, the conqueror of Puerto Rico,
landed in Florida in 1513 in search of wealth and slaves. Álvar Núñez
Cabeza de Vaca joined the Narváez expedition to Florida a decade later
but was shipwrecked and forced to embark on a remarkable multiyear
odyssey across the Gulf of Mexico and Texas into Mexico. Pedro Mené-
ndez de Avilés founded St. Augustine, Florida, in 1565, and it remains
the oldest continuously occupied European settlement in the present-day
United States.
    But without the rich gold and silver mines of Mexico, the plantation-
friendly climate of the Caribbean, or the exploitive potential of large In-
dian empires, North America offered little incentive for Spanish officials.
Still, Spanish expeditions combed North America. Francisco Vázquez de
Coronado pillaged his way across the Southwest. Hernando de Soto tor-
tured and raped and enslaved his way across the Southeast. Soon Spain
had footholds—however tenuous—across much of the continent.


V. Conclusion
The “discovery” of America unleashed horrors. Europeans embarked on
a debauching path of death and destructive exploitation that unleashed
murder and greed and slavery. But disease was deadlier than any weapon
in the European arsenal. It unleashed death on a scale never before seen
in human history. Estimates of the population of pre-Columbian Amer-
ica range wildly. Some argue for as much as 100 million, some as low as
2 million. In 1983, Henry Dobyns put the number at 18 million. What-
ever the precise estimates, nearly all scholars tell of the utter devasta-
tion wrought by European disease. Dobyns estimated that in the first
130 years following European contact, 95 percent of Native Americans
perished.30 (At its worst, Europe’s Black Death peaked at death rates of 25
to 33 percent. Nothing else in history rivals the American demographic
disaster.) A ten-thousand-year history of disease hit the New World in an



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
24                                                                           Chap ter 1


            instant. Smallpox, typhus, bubonic plague, influenza, mumps, measles:
            pandemics ravaged populations up and down the continents. Wave after
            wave of disease crashed relentlessly. Disease flung whole communities
            into chaos. Others it destroyed completely.
                 Disease was only the most terrible in a cross-hemispheric exchange
            of violence, culture, trade, and peoples—the so-called Columbian
            ­Exchange—that followed in Columbus’s wake. Global diets, for instance,
             were transformed. The Americas’ calorie-rich crops revolutionized Old
             World agriculture and spawned a worldwide population boom. Many
             modern associations between food and geography are but products of the
             Columbian Exchange: potatoes in Ireland, tomatoes in Italy, chocolate in
             Switzerland, peppers in Thailand, and oranges in Florida are all manifes-
             tations of the new global exchange. Europeans, for their part, introduced
             their domesticated animals to the New World. Pigs ran rampant through
             the Americas, transforming the landscape as they spread throughout both
             continents. Horses spread as well, transforming the Native American cul-
             tures who adapted to the newly introduced animal. Partly from trade,
             partly from the remnants of failed European expeditions, and partly from
             theft, Indians acquired horses and transformed Native American life in
             the vast North American plains.
                 The Europeans’ arrival bridged two worlds and ten thousand years of
             history largely separated from each other since the closing of the Bering
             Strait. Both sides of the world had been transformed. And neither would
             ever again be the same.


            VI. Reference Material
            This chapter was edited by Joseph Locke and Ben Wright, with content contribu-
            tions by L. D. Burnett, Michelle Cassidy, D. Andrew Johnson, Joseph Locke, Dawn
            Marsh, Christen Mucher, Cameron Shriver, Ben Wright, and Garrett Wright.
                Recommended citation: L. D. Burnett et al., “The New World,” in The Amer-
            ican Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
            Press, 2019).

            Notes to Ch a p ter 1
                1. A. L. Kroeber, ed., University of California Publications: American Ar-
            chaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 10 (Berkeley: University of California Press,
            1911–1914), 191–192.
                2. James F. Barnett Jr., Mississippi’s American Indians (Jackson: University
            Press of Mississippi, 2012), 90.
                3. Edward W. Osowski, Indigenous Miracles: Nahua Authority in Colonial
            Mexico (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2010), 25.

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                  25


     4. David J. Meltzer, First Peoples in a New World: Colonizing Ice Age Amer-
ica (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2010), 170.
     5. Knut R. Fladmark, “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early
Man in North America,” American Antiquity 44, no. 1 (1979): 55–69.
     6. Jessi J. Halligan et al., “Pre-Clovis Occupation 14,550 Years Ago at the
Page-Ladson Site, Florida, and the People of the Americas,” Science Advances 2,
no. 5 (May 13, 2016).
     7. Tom D. Dillehay, The Settlement of the Americas: A New Prehistory (New
York: Basic Books, 2000).
     8. Richard A. Diehl, The Olmecs: America’s First Civilization (London:
Thames and Hudson, 2004), 25.
     9. Jane Mt. Pleasant, “A New Paradigm for Pre-Columbian Agriculture in
North America,” Early American Studies 13, no. 2 (Spring 2015): 374–412.
     10. Richard H. Steckel, “Health and Nutrition in Pre-Columbian America:
The Skeletal Evidence,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 36, no. 1 (Summer
2005): 19–21.
     11. Elizabeth Hill Boone and Walter D. Mignolo, eds., Writing Without
Words: Alternative Literacies in Mesoamerica and the Andes (Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 1994).
     12. Stuart J. Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1992), 217.
     13. H. Wolcott Toll, “Making and Breaking Pots in the Chaco World,”
American Antiquity 66, no. 1 (January 2001): 65.
     14. Anna Sofaer, “The Primary Architecture of the Chacoan Culture: A Cos-
mological Expression,” in Anasazi Architecture and American Design, ed. Baker
H. Morrow and V. B. Price (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
1997).
     15. Timothy R. Pauketat and Thomas E. Emerson, eds., Cahokia: Domina-
tion and Ideology in the Mississippian World (Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1997), 31.
     16. Thomas E. Emerson, “An Introduction to Cahokia 2002: Diversity,
Complexity, and History,” Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 27, no. 2
(Fall 2002): 137–139.
     17. Amy Schutt, Peoples of the River Valleys: The Odyssey of the Delaware
Indians (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007), 7–30.
     18. Erna Gunther, “An Analysis of the First Salmon Ceremony,” American
Anthropologist 28, no. 4 (October–December 1926): 605–617.
     19. Gary E. Moulton, ed., The Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedi-
tion, Vol. 6 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1983), https://​www​.loc​.gov/​
exhibits/​lewisandclark/​transcript68​.html.
     20. Coll Thrush, Native Seattle: Histories from the Crossing-Over Place,
2nd ed. (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2007), 126.
     21. Clements R. Markham, ed. and trans., The Journal of Christopher Co-
lumbus (During His First Voyage), and Documents Relating to the Voyages
of John Cabot and Gaspar Corte Real (London: Hakluyt Society, 1893), 73,
135, 41.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
26                                                                               Chap ter 1


                22. Bartolomé de Las Casas, A Brief Account of the Destruction of the In-
            dies . . . (1552; Project Gutenberg, 2007), 147. http://​www​.gutenberg​.org/​ebooks
            /​20321, accessed June 11, 2018.
                23. Dean R. Snow, “Microchronology and Demographic Evidence Relating
            to the Size of Pre-Columbian North American Indian Populations,” Science 268,
            no. 5217 (June 16, 1995): 1601.
                24. Jack Weatherford, Indian Givers: How the Indians of the Americas
            Transformed the World (New York: Random House, 1988), 195.
                25. J. H. Elliott, Imperial Spain 1469–1716 (London: Edward Arnold,
            1963), 53.
                26. Bernal Díaz del Castillo, The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico, 1517–
            1521, trans. A. P. Maudslay (New York: Da Capo Press, 1996), 190–191.
                27. Bernardino de Sahagún, Florentine Codex: General History of the Things
            of New Spain (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1970).
                28. Suzanne Bost, Mulattas and Mestizas: Representing Mixed Identities in
            the Americas, 1850–2000 (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2003), 27.
                29. Stafford Poole, C. M., Our Lady of Guadalupe: The Origins and Sources
            of a Mexican National Symbol, 1531–1797 (Tucson: University of Arizona Press,
            1995.
                30. Henry F. Dobyns, Their Number Become Thinned: Native American
            Population Dynamics in Eastern North America (Knoxville: University of Ten-
            nessee Press, 1983).

            R e c o mm e n d e d R e a din g
            Alt, Susan, ed. Ancient Complexities: New Perspectives in Pre-Columbian North
                 America. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 2010.
            Bruhns, Karen Olsen. Ancient South America. New York: Cambridge University
                Press, 1994.
            Claasen, Cheryl, and Rosemary A. Joyce, eds. Women in Prehistory: North Amer-
                ica and Mesoamerica. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1994.
            Cook, Noble David. Born to Die: Disease and New World Conquest, 1492–
                1650. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
            Crosby, Alfred W. The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Conse-
                quences of 1492. New York: Praeger, 2003.
            Dewar, Elaine. Bones. Toronto: Vintage Canada, 2001.
            Dye, David. War Paths, Peace Paths: An Archaeology of Cooperation and
                ­Conflict in Native Eastern North America. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press,
                 2009.
            Fenn, Elizabeth A. Encounters at the Heart of the World: A History of the Man-
                dan People. New York: Hill and Wang, 2014.
            Jablonski, Nina G. The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the
                New World. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.
            John, Elizabeth A. H. Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation
                of Indians, Spanish, and French in the Southwest, 1540–1795, 2nd ed. Nor-
                man: University of Oklahoma Press, 1996.



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he N e w W o r l d                                                                 27


Kehoe, Alice Beck. America Before the European Invasions. New York: Rout-
    ledge, 2002.
Leon-Portilla, Miguel. The Broken Spears: The Aztec Account of the Conquest of
    Mexico. Boston: Beacon Books, 1992.
Mann, Charles C. 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus.
    New York: Vintage Books, 2006.
Meltzer, David J. First Peoples in a New World: Colonizing Ice Age America.
    Berkeley: University of California Press, 2010.
Mt. Pleasant, Jane. “A New Paradigm for Pre-Columbian Agriculture in North
    America.” Early American Studies 13, no. 2 (Spring 2015): 374–412.
Oswalt, Wendell H. This Land Was Theirs: A Study of Native North Americans.
    New York: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Pauketat, Timothy R. Cahokia: Ancient America’s Great City on the Mississippi.
    New York: Penguin, 2010.
Pringle, Heather. In Search of Ancient North America: An Archaeological Jour-
    ney to Forgotten Cultures. New York: Wiley, 1996.
Reséndez, Andrés. A Land So Strange: The Epic Journey of Cabeza de Vaca. New
    York: Basic Books, 2009.
Restall, Matthew. Seven Myths of the Spanish Conquest. New York: Oxford Uni-
    versity Press, 2004.
Scarry, C. Margaret. Foraging and Farming in the Eastern Woodlands. Gaines-
    ville: University Press of Florida, 1993.
Schwartz, Stuart B. Victors and Vanquished: Spanish and Nahua Views of the
    Conquest of Mexico. New York: Bedford St. Martin’s, 2000.
Seed, Patricia. Ceremonies of Possession: Europe’s Conquest of the New World,
    1492–1640. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Townsend, Camilla. Malintzin’s Choices: An Indian Woman in the Conquest of
    Mexico. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2006.
Weatherford, Jack. Indian Givers: How the Indians of the Americas Transformed
    the World. New York: Random House, 1988.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2
Colliding Cultures

I. Introduction
The Columbian Exchange transformed both sides of the Atlantic, but            Theodor de Bry,
                                                                              Negotiating Peace
with dramatically disparate outcomes. New diseases wiped out entire civ-      with the Indians,
ilizations in the Americas, while newly imported nutrient-rich foodstuffs     1634. Virginia
enabled a European population boom. Spain benefited most immediately          Historical Society.

as the wealth of the Aztec and Incan Empires strengthened the Spanish
monarchy. Spain used its new riches to gain an advantage over other
European nations, but this advantage was soon contested.
    Portugal, France, the Netherlands, and England all raced to the New
World, eager to match the gains of the Spanish. Native peoples greeted
the new visitors with responses ranging from welcoming cooperation to
aggressive violence, but the ravages of disease and the possibility of new
trading relationships enabled Europeans to create settlements all along
the western rim of the Atlantic world. New empires would emerge from


             © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                      Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  29


these tenuous beginnings, and by the end of the seventeenth century,
Spain would lose its privileged position to its rivals. An age of coloniza-
tion had begun and, with it, a great collision of cultures commenced.


II. Spanish America
Spain extended its reach in the Americas after reaping the benefits of
its colonies in Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. Expeditions
slowly began combing the continent and bringing Europeans into the
modern-day United States in the hopes of establishing religious and eco-
nomic dominance in a new territory.
     Juan Ponce de León arrived in the area named La Florida in 1513.
He found between 150,000 and 300,000 Native Americans. But then
two and a half centuries of contact with European and African ­peoples—
whether through war, slave raids, or, most dramatically, foreign
­disease—­decimated Florida’s indigenous population. European explor-
 ers, meanwhile, had hoped to find great wealth in Florida, but reality
never aligned with their imaginations.                                           1513 Atlantic
    In the first half of the sixteenth century, Spanish colonizers fought fre-   map from carto­
                                                                                 grapher Martin
quently with Florida’s Native peoples as well as with other Europeans. In        Waldseemuller.
the 1560s Spain expelled French Protestants, called Huguenots, from the          Wikimedia.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 0 cha pter 2


        area near modern-day Jacksonville in northeast Florida. In 1586 English
        privateer Sir Francis Drake burned the wooden settlement of St. Augus-
        tine. At the dawn of the seventeenth century, Spain’s reach in Florida
        extended from the mouth of the St. Johns River south to the environs of
        St. Augustine—an area of roughly 1,000 square miles. The Spaniards at-
        tempted to duplicate methods for establishing control used previously in
        Mexico, the Caribbean, and the Andes. The Crown granted missionaries
        the right to live among Timucua and Guale villagers in the late 1500s and
        early 1600s and encouraged settlement through the encomienda system
        (grants of Indian labor).1
            In the 1630s, the mission system extended into the Apalachee district
        in the Florida panhandle. The Apalachee, one of the most powerful tribes
        in Florida at the time of contact, claimed the territory from the modern
        Florida-Georgia border to the Gulf of Mexico. Apalachee farmers grew
        an abundance of corn and other crops. Indian traders carried surplus
        products east along the Camino Real (the royal road) that connected the
        western anchor of the mission system with St. Augustine. Spanish settlers
        drove cattle eastward across the St. Johns River and established ranches
        as far west as Apalachee. Still, Spain held Florida tenuously.
            Farther west, in 1598, Juan de Oñate led four hundred settlers, sol-
        diers, and missionaries from Mexico into New Mexico. The Spanish
        Southwest had brutal beginnings. When Oñate sacked the Pueblo city
        of Acoma, the “sky city,” the Spaniards slaughtered nearly half of its
        roughly 1,500 inhabitants, including women and children. Oñate or-
        dered one foot cut off every surviving male over age fifteen, and he en-
        slaved the remaining women and children.2
            Santa Fe, the first permanent European settlement in the Southwest,
        was established in 1610. Few Spaniards relocated to the Southwest be-
        cause of the distance from Mexico City and the dry and hostile environ-
        ment. Thus, the Spanish never achieved a commanding presence in the
        region. By 1680, only about three thousand colonists called Spanish New
        Mexico home.3 There, they traded with and exploited the local Puebloan
        peoples. The region’s Puebloan population had plummeted from as many
        as sixty thousand in 1600 to about seventeen thousand in 1680.4
            Spain shifted strategies after the military expeditions wove their way
        through the southern and western half of North America. Missions be-
        came the engine of colonization in North America. Missionaries, most of
        whom were members of the Franciscan religious order, provided Spain
        with an advance guard in North America. Catholicism had always justi-



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  31


fied Spanish conquest, and colonization always carried religious impera-
tives. By the early seventeenth century, Spanish friars had established
dozens of missions along the Rio Grande and in California.


III. Spain’s Rivals Emerge
While Spain plundered the New World, unrest plagued Europe. The Ref-
ormation threw England and France, the two European powers capable
of contesting Spain, into turmoil. Long and expensive conflicts drained
time, resources, and lives. Millions died from religious violence in France
alone. As the violence diminished in Europe, however, religious and po-
litical rivalries continued in the New World.
     The Spanish exploitation of New Spain’s riches inspired European
monarchs to invest in exploration and conquest. Reports of Spanish
atrocities spread throughout Europe and provided a humanitarian justi-
fication for European colonization. An English reprint of the writings of
Bartolomé de Las Casas bore the sensational title “Popery Truly Display’d      The earliest plan
in its Bloody Colours: Or, a Faithful Narrative of the Horrid and Unex-        of New Am-
                                                                               sterdam (now
ampled Massacres, Butcheries, and all manners of Cruelties that Hell and       Manhattan),
Malice could invent, committed by the Popish Spanish.” An English writer       1660. Wikimedia.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 2 cha pter 2


        explained that the Indians “were simple and plain men, and lived without
        great labour,” but in their lust for gold the Spaniards “forced the people
        (that were not used to labour) to stand all the daie in the hot sun gather-
        ing gold in the sand of the rivers. By this means a great number of them
        (not used to such pains) died, and a great number of them (seeing them-
        selves brought from so quiet a life to such misery and slavery) of despera-
        tion killed themselves. And many would not marry, because they would
        not have their children slaves to the Spaniards.”5 The Spanish accused
        their critics of fostering a “Black Legend.” The Black Legend drew on
        religious differences and political rivalries. Spain had successful conquests
        in France, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands and left many in those na-
        tions yearning to break free from Spanish influence. English writers argued
        that Spanish barbarities were foiling a tremendous opportunity for the
        expansion of Christianity across the globe and that a benevolent conquest
        of the New World by non-Spanish monarchies offered the surest salvation
        of the New World’s pagan masses. With these religious justifications, and
        with obvious economic motives, Spain’s rivals arrived in the New World.

        The F r e nch
        The French crown subsidized exploration in the early sixteenth century.
        Early French explorers sought a fabled Northwest Passage, a mythical
        waterway passing through the North American continent to Asia. De-
        spite the wealth of the New World, Asia’s riches still beckoned to Eu-
        ropeans. Canada’s St. Lawrence River appeared to be such a passage,
        stretching deep into the continent and into the Great Lakes. French colo-
        nial possessions centered on these bodies of water (and, later, down the
        Mississippi River to the port of New Orleans).
            French colonization developed through investment from private trad-
        ing companies. Traders established Port Royal in Acadia (Nova Scotia) in
        1603 and launched trading expeditions that stretched down the Atlantic
        coast as far as Cape Cod. The needs of the fur trade set the future pat-
        tern of French colonization. Founded in 1608 under the leadership of
        Samuel de Champlain, Quebec provided the foothold for what would
        become New France. French fur traders placed a higher value on co­
        operating with the Indians than on establishing a successful French co-
        lonial footprint. Asserting dominance in the region could have been to
        their own detriment, as it might have compromised their access to skilled
        Indian trappers, and therefore wealth. Few Frenchmen traveled to the
        New World to settle permanently. In fact, few traveled at all. Many per-



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  33




secuted French Protestants (Huguenots) sought to emigrate after France         This depiction
                                                                               of New Orleans
criminalized Protestantism in 1685, but all non-Catholics were forbidden       in 1726 when it
in New France.6                                                                was an eight-
     The French preference for trade over permanent settlement fostered        year-old French
                                                                               frontier settle-
more cooperative and mutually beneficial relationships with Native             ment. Jean-Pierre
Americans than was typical among the Spanish and English. Perhaps              Lassus, Veüe et
                                                                               Perspective de la
eager to debunk the anti-Catholic elements of the Black Legend, the            Nouvelle Orleans,
French worked to cultivate cooperation with Indians. Jesuit missionar-         1726, Centre des
                                                                               archives d’outre-
ies, for instance, adopted different conversion strategies than the Spanish    mer, France.
Franciscans. Spanish missionaries brought Indians into enclosed mis-           Wikimedia.
sions, whereas Jesuits more often lived with or alongside Indian groups.
Many French fur traders married Indian women.7 The offspring of Indian
women and French men were so common in New France that the French
developed a word for these children, Métis(sage). The Huron people
developed a particularly close relationship with the French, and many
converted to Christianity and engaged in the fur trade. But close relation-
ships with the French would come at a high cost. The Huron were deci-
mated by the ravages of European disease, and entanglements in French
and Dutch conflicts proved disastrous.8 Despite this, some Native peoples
maintained alliances with the French.
     Pressure from the powerful Iroquois in the East pushed many
­Algonquian-speaking peoples toward French territory in the midseven-
 teenth century, and together they crafted what historians have called a
 “middle ground,” a kind of cross-cultural space that allowed for native
 and European interaction, negotiation, and accommodation. French
 traders adopted—sometimes clumsily—the gift-giving and mediation
 strategies expected of Native leaders. Natives similarly engaged the im-
 personal European market and adapted—often haphazardly—to Euro-
 pean laws. The Great Lakes “middle ground” experienced tumultuous



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 4 cha pter 2


        s­uccess t­hroughout the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries
         until English colonial officials and American settlers swarmed the region.
         The pressures of European expansion strained even the closest bonds.9


        T h e Du t c h
        The Netherlands, a small maritime nation with great wealth, achieved
        considerable colonial success. In 1581, the Netherlands had officially
        broken away from the Hapsburgs and won a reputation as the freest
        of the new European nations. Dutch women maintained separate legal
        identities from their husbands and could therefore hold property and
        inherit full estates.
            Ravaged by the turmoil of the Reformation, the Dutch embraced
        greater religious tolerance and freedom of the press than other European
        nations.10 Radical Protestants, Catholics, and Jews flocked to the Nether­
        lands. The English Pilgrims, for instance, fled first to the Netherlands
        before sailing to the New World years later. The Netherlands built its
        colonial empire through the work of experienced merchants and skilled
        sailors. The Dutch were the most advanced capitalists in the modern
        world and marshaled extensive financial resources by creating innovative
        financial organizations such as the Amsterdam Stock Exchange and the
        East India Company. Although the Dutch offered liberties, they offered
        very little democracy—power remained in the hands of only a few. And
        Dutch liberties certainly had their limits. The Dutch advanced the slave
        trade and brought African slaves with them to the New World. Slavery
        was an essential part of Dutch capitalist triumphs.
            Sharing the European hunger for access to Asia, in 1609 the Dutch
        commissioned the Englishman Henry Hudson to discover the fabled
        Northwest Passage through North America. He failed, of course, but
        nevertheless found the Hudson River and claimed modern-day New
        York for the Dutch. There they established New Netherland, an essential
        part of the Dutch New World empire. The Netherlands chartered the
        Dutch West India Company in 1621 and established colonies in Africa,
        the Caribbean, and North America. The island of Manhattan provided
        a launching pad to support its Caribbean colonies and attack Spanish
        trade.
            Spiteful of the Spanish and mindful of the Black Legend, the Dutch
        were determined not to repeat Spanish atrocities. They fashioned guide-
        lines for New Netherland that conformed to the ideas of Hugo Gro-
        tius, a legal philosopher who believed that Native peoples possessed the



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  35


same natural rights as Europeans. Colony leaders insisted that land be
purchased; in 1626 Peter Minuit therefore “bought” Manhattan from
Munsee Indians.11 Despite the seemingly honorable intentions, it is likely
the Dutch paid the wrong Indians for the land (either intentionally or
unintentionally) or that the Munsee and the Dutch understood the trans-
action in very different terms. Transactions like these illustrated both the
Dutch attempt to find a more peaceful process of colonization and the
inconsistency between European and Native American understandings
of property.
    Like the French, the Dutch sought to profit, not to conquer. Trade
with Native peoples became New Netherland’s central economic activity.
Dutch traders carried wampum along Native trade routes and exchanged
it for beaver pelts. Wampum consisted of shell beads fashioned by Al-
gonquian Indians on the southern New England coast and was valued as
a ceremonial and diplomatic commodity among the Iroquois. Wampum
became a currency that could buy anything from a loaf of bread to a plot
of land.12
    In addition to developing these trading networks, the Dutch also
established farms, settlements, and lumber camps. The West India
Company directors implemented the patroon system to encourage colo-
nization. The patroon system granted large estates to wealthy landlords,
who subsequently paid passage for the tenants to work their land. Ex-
panding Dutch settlements correlated with deteriorating relations with
local Indians. In the interior of the continent, the Dutch retained valuable
alliances with the Iroquois to maintain Beverwijck, modern-day Albany,
as a hub for the fur trade.13 In the places where the Dutch built perma-
nent settlements, the ideals of peaceful colonization succumbed to the
settlers’ increasing demand for land. Armed conflicts erupted as colonial
settlements encroached on Native villages and hunting lands. Profit and
peace, it seemed, could not coexist.
    Labor shortages, meanwhile, crippled Dutch colonization. The pa-
troon system failed to bring enough tenants, and the colony could not
attract a sufficient number of indentured servants to satisfy the colony’s
backers. In response, the colony imported eleven company-owned slaves
in 1626, the same year that Minuit purchased Manhattan. Slaves were
tasked with building New Amsterdam (modern-day New York City), in-
cluding a defensive wall along the northern edge of the colony (the site of
modern-day Wall Street). They created its roads and maintained its all-
important port. Fears of racial mixing led the Dutch to import enslaved



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 6 cha pter 2


        women, enabling the formation of African Dutch families. The colony’s
        first African marriage occurred in 1641, and by 1650 there were at least
        five hundred African slaves in the colony. By 1660, New Amsterdam had
        the largest urban slave population on the continent.14
            As was typical of the practice of African slavery in much of the early
        seventeenth century, Dutch slavery in New Amsterdam was less com-
        prehensively exploitative than later systems of American slavery. Some
        enslaved Africans, for instance, successfully sued for back wages. When
        several company-owned slaves fought for the colony against the Mun-
        see Indians, they petitioned for their freedom and won a kind of “half
        freedom” that allowed them to work their own land in return for paying
        a large tithe, or tax, to their masters. The children of these “half-free”
        laborers remained held in bondage by the West India Company, how-
        ever. The Dutch, who so proudly touted their liberties, grappled with
        the reality of African slavery, and some New Netherlanders protested
        the enslavement of Christianized Africans. The economic goals of the
        colony slowly crowded out these cultural and religious objections, and
        the much-boasted liberties of the Dutch came to exist alongside increas-
        ingly brutal systems of slavery.

        The Portugu ese
        The Portuguese had been leaders in Atlantic navigation well ahead of
        Columbus’s voyage. But the incredible wealth flowing from New Spain
        piqued the rivalry between the two Iberian countries, and accelerated
        Portuguese colonization efforts. This rivalry created a crisis within the
        Catholic world as Spain and Portugal squared off in a battle for colo-
        nial supremacy. The pope intervened and divided the New World with
        the Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494. Land east of the Tordesillas Meridian,
        an imaginary line dividing South America, would be given to Portugal,
        whereas land west of the line was reserved for Spanish conquest. In re-
        turn for the license to conquer, both Portugal and Spain were instructed
        to treat the natives with Christian compassion and to bring them under
        the protection of the Church.
            Lucrative colonies in Africa and India initially preoccupied Portugal,
        but by 1530 the Portuguese turned their attention to the land that would
        become Brazil, driving out French traders and establishing permanent
        settlements. Gold and silver mines dotted the interior of the colony, but
        two industries powered early colonial Brazil: sugar and the slave trade.
        In fact, over the entire history of the Atlantic slave trade, more Africans



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  37


were enslaved in Brazil than in any other colony in the Atlantic World.
Gold mines emerged in greater numbers throughout the eighteenth cen-
tury but still never rivaled the profitability of sugar or slave trading.
    Jesuit missionaries brought Christianity to Brazil, but strong elements
of African and Native spirituality mixed with orthodox Catholicism to
create a unique religious culture. This culture resulted from the demo-
graphics of Brazilian slavery. High mortality rates on sugar plantations
required a steady influx of new slaves, thus perpetuating the cultural
connection between Brazil and Africa. The reliance on new imports of
slaves increased the likelihood of resistance, however, and escaped slaves
managed to create several free settlements, called quilombos. These
settlements drew from both African and Native slaves, and despite fre-
quent attacks, several endured throughout the long history of Brazilian
slavery.15
    Despite the arrival of these new Europeans, Spain continued to domi-
nate the New World. The wealth flowing from the exploitation of the
Aztec and Incan Empires greatly eclipsed the profits of other European
nations. But this dominance would not last long. By the end of the six-
teenth century, the powerful Spanish Armada would be destroyed, and
the English would begin to rule the waves.


IV. English Colonization
Spain had a one-hundred-year head start on New World colonization,
and a jealous England eyed the enormous wealth that Spain gleaned. The
Protestant Reformation had shaken England, but Elizabeth I assumed
the English crown in 1558. Elizabeth oversaw England’s so-called golden
age, which included both the expansion of trade and exploration and
the literary achievements of Shakespeare and Marlowe. English mercan-
tilism, a state-assisted manufacturing and trading system, created and
maintained markets. The markets provided a steady supply of consum-
ers and laborers, stimulated economic expansion, and increased English
wealth.
     However, wrenching social and economic changes unsettled the En­
glish population. The island’s population increased from fewer than three
million in 1500 to over five million by the middle of the seventeenth
century.16 The skyrocketing cost of land coincided with plummeting
farming income. Rents and prices rose but wages stagnated. Moreover,
movements to enclose public land—sparked by the transition of English



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 8 cha pter 2




Nicholas Hilliard,   landholders from agriculture to livestock raising—evicted tenants from
The Battle of
Gravelines, 1588.
                     the land and created hordes of landless, jobless peasants that haunted the
Wikimedia.           cities and countryside. One quarter to one half of the population lived in
                     extreme poverty.17
                         New World colonization won support in England amid a time of
                     rising English fortunes among the wealthy, a tense Spanish rivalry, and
                     mounting internal social unrest. But supporters of English colonization
                     always touted more than economic gains and mere national self-interest.
                     They claimed to be doing God’s work. Many claimed that colonization
                     would glorify God, England, and Protestantism by Christianizing the
                     New World’s pagan peoples. Advocates such as Richard Hakluyt the
                     Younger and John Dee, for instance, drew upon The History of the Kings
                     of Britain, written by the twelfth-century monk Geoffrey of Monmouth,
                     and its mythical account of King Arthur’s conquest and Christianiza-
                     tion of pagan lands to justify American conquest.18 Moreover, promot-
                     ers promised that the conversion of New World Indians would satisfy
                     God and glorify England’s “Virgin Queen,” Elizabeth I, who was seen



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  39


as nearly divine by some in England. The English—and other European
Protestant colonizers—imagined themselves superior to the Spanish, who
still bore the Black Legend of inhuman cruelty. English colonization, sup-
porters argued, would prove that superiority.
     In his 1584 “Discourse on Western Planting,” Richard Hakluyt
amassed the supposed religious, moral, and exceptional economic bene-
fits of colonization. He repeated the Black Legend of Spanish New World
terrorism and attacked the sins of Catholic Spain. He promised that En­
glish colonization could strike a blow against Spanish heresy and bring
Protestant religion to the New World. English interference, Hakluyt sug-
gested, might provide the only salvation from Catholic rule in the New
World. The New World, too, he said, offered obvious economic advan-
tages. Trade and resource extraction would enrich the English treasury.
England, for instance, could find plentiful materials to outfit a world-
class navy. Moreover, he said, the New World could provide an escape
for England’s vast armies of landless “vagabonds.” Expanded trade, he
argued, would not only bring profit but also provide work for England’s
jobless poor. A Christian enterprise, a blow against Spain, an economic
stimulus, and a social safety valve all beckoned the English toward a
commitment to colonization.19
     This noble rhetoric veiled the coarse economic motives that brought
England to the New World. New economic structures and a new mer-
chant class paved the way for colonization. England’s merchants lacked
estates, but they had new plans to build wealth. By collaborating with
new government-sponsored trading monopolies and employing financial
innovations such as joint-stock companies, England’s merchants sought
to improve on the Dutch economic system. Spain was extracting enor-
mous material wealth from the New World; why shouldn’t England?
Joint-stock companies, the ancestors of modern corporations, became
the initial instruments of colonization. With government monopolies,
shared profits, and managed risks, these money-making ventures could
attract and manage the vast capital needed for colonization. In 1606
James I approved the formation of the Virginia Company (named after
Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen).
     Rather than formal colonization, however, the most successful early
English ventures in the New World were a form of state-sponsored pi-
racy known as privateering. Queen Elizabeth sponsored sailors, or “Sea
Dogges,” such as John Hawkins and Francis Drake, to plunder Span-
ish ships and towns in the Americas. Privateers earned a substantial



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 0 cha pter 2


        profit both for themselves and for the English crown. England prac-
        ticed piracy on a scale, one historian wrote, “that transforms crime
        into politics.”20 Francis Drake harried Spanish ships throughout the
        Western Hemisphere and raided Spanish caravans as far away as the
        coast of Peru on the Pacific Ocean. In 1580 Elizabeth rewarded her
        skilled pirate with knighthood. But Elizabeth walked a fine line. With
        Protestant-Catholic tensions already running high, English privateer-
        ing provoked Spain. Tensions worsened after the execution of Mary,
        Queen of Scots, a Catholic. In 1588, King Philip II of Spain unleashed
        the fabled Armada. With 130 ships, 8,000 sailors, and 18,000 soldiers,
        Spain launched the largest invasion in history to destroy the British
        navy and depose Elizabeth.
            An island nation, England depended on a robust navy for trade and
        territorial expansion. England had fewer ships than Spain, but they were
        smaller and swifter. They successfully harassed the armada, forcing it to
        retreat to the Netherlands for reinforcements. But then a fluke storm,
        celebrated in England as the “divine wind,” annihilated the remainder
        of the fleet.21 The destruction of the armada changed the course of world
        history. It not only saved England and secured English Protestantism,
        but it also opened the seas to English expansion and paved the way for
        England’s colonial future. By 1600, England stood ready to embark on its
        dominance over North America.
            English colonization would look very different from Spanish or
        French colonization. England had long been trying to conquer Catho-
        lic Ireland. Rather than integrating with the Irish and trying to convert
        them to Protestantism, England more often simply seized land through
        violence and pushed out the former inhabitants, leaving them to move
        elsewhere or to die. These same tactics would later be deployed in North
        American invasions.
            English colonization, however, began haltingly. Sir Humphrey Gilbert
        labored throughout the late sixteenth century to establish a colony in
        Newfoundland but failed. In 1587, with a predominantly male cohort of
        150 English colonizers, John White reestablished an abandoned settle-
        ment on North Carolina’s Roanoke Island. Supply shortages prompted
        White to return to England for additional support, but the Spanish Ar-
        mada and the mobilization of British naval efforts stranded him in Britain
        for several years. When he finally returned to Roanoke, he found the
        colony abandoned. What befell the failed colony? White found the word
        Croatan carved into a tree or a post in the abandoned colony. Historians



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  41


presume the colonists, short of food, may have fled for a nearby island
of that name and encountered its settled native population. Others offer
violence as an explanation. Regardless, the English colonists were never
heard from again. When Queen Elizabeth died in 1603, no Englishmen
had yet established a permanent North American colony.
    After King James made peace with Spain in 1604, privateering no lon-
ger held out the promise of cheap wealth. Colonization assumed a new
urgency. The Virginia Company, established in 1606, drew inspiration
from Cortés and the Spanish conquests. It hoped to find gold and silver as
well as other valuable trading commodities in the New World: glass, iron,
furs, pitch, tar, and anything else the country could supply. The company
planned to identify a navigable river with a deep harbor, away from the
eyes of the Spanish. There they would find an Indian trading network and
extract a fortune from the New World.


V. Jamestown
In April 1607 Englishmen aboard three ships—the Susan Constant, the            Incolarum Vir-
Godspeed, and the Discovery—sailed forty miles up the James River              giniae piscandi
                                                                               ratio (The Method
(named for the English king) in present-day Virginia (named for Eliza-         of Fishing of the
beth I, the Virgin Queen) and settled on just such a place. The unin-          Inhabitants of
                                                                               Virginia), c. 1590.
habited peninsula they selected was upriver and out of sight of Spanish        The Encyclopedia
patrols. It offered easy defense against ground assaults and was both          Virginia.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 2 cha pter 2


        uninhabited and located close to many Indian villages and their poten-
        tially lucrative trade networks. But the location was a disaster. Indians
        had ignored the peninsula for two reasons: terrible soil hampered agri-
        culture, and brackish tidal water led to debilitating disease. Despite these
        setbacks, the English built Jamestown, the first permanent English colony
        in the present-day United States.
            The English had not entered a wilderness but had arrived amid a
        people they called the Powhatan Confederacy. Powhatan, or Wahunsena-
        cawh, as he called himself, led nearly ten thousand Algonquian-speaking
        Indians in the Chesapeake. They burned vast acreage to clear brush and
        create sprawling artificial parklike grasslands so they could easily hunt
        deer, elk, and bison. The Powhatan raised corn, beans, squash, and pos-
        sibly sunflowers, rotating acreage throughout the Chesapeake. Without
        plows, manure, or draft animals, the Powhatan produced a remarkable
        number of calories cheaply and efficiently.
            Jamestown was a profit-seeking venture backed by investors. The
        colonists were mostly gentlemen and proved entirely unprepared for
        the challenges ahead. They hoped for easy riches but found none. As
        John Smith later complained, they “would rather starve than work.”22
        And so they did. Disease and starvation ravaged the colonists, thanks in
        part to the peninsula’s unhealthy location and the fact that supplies from
        En­gland arrived sporadically or spoiled. Fewer than half of the original
        colonists survived the first nine months.
            John Smith, a yeoman’s son and capable leader, took command of
        the crippled colony and promised, “He that will not work shall not eat.”
        He navigated Indian diplomacy, claiming that he was captured and sen-
        tenced to death but Powhatan’s daughter, Pocahontas, intervened to save
        his life. She would later marry another colonist, John Rolfe, and die in
        England.
            Powhatan kept the English alive that first winter. The Powhatan had
        welcomed the English and placed a high value on metal ax-heads, kettles,
        tools, and guns and eagerly traded furs and other abundant goods for
        them. With ten thousand confederated natives and with food in abun-
        dance, the Indians had little to fear and much to gain from the isolated
        outpost of sick and dying Englishmen.
            Despite reinforcements, the English continued to die. Four hundred
        settlers arrived in 1609, but the overwhelmed colony entered a desperate
        “starving time” in the winter of 1609–1610. Supplies were lost at sea.
        Relations with the Indians deteriorated and the colonists fought a kind



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  43




of slow-burning guerrilla war with the Powhatan. Disaster loomed for           John White,
                                                                               Village of the
the colony. The settlers ate everything they could, roaming the woods          Secotan, 1585.
for nuts and berries. They boiled leather. They dug up graves to eat the       Wikimedia.
corpses of their former neighbors. One man was executed for killing and
eating his wife. Some years later, George Percy recalled the colonists’
desperation during these years, when he served as the colony’s president:
“Having fed upon our horses and other beasts as long as they lasted, we
were glad to make shift with vermin as dogs, cats, rats and mice . . . as
to eat boots shoes or any other leather. . . . And now famine beginning
to look ghastly and pale in every face, that nothing was spared to main-
tain life and to do those things which seem incredible, as to dig up dead
corpses out of graves and to eat them.”23 Archaeological excavations in
2012 exhumed the bones of a fourteen-year-old girl that exhibited signs
of cannibalism.24 All but sixty settlers would die by the summer of 1610.
    Little improved over the next several years. By 1616, 80 percent of
all English immigrants who had arrived in Jamestown had perished. Eng-
land’s first American colony was a catastrophe. The colony was reor-
ganized, and in 1614 the marriage of Pocahontas to John Rolfe eased
relations with the Powhatan, though the colony still limped along as a
starving, commercially disastrous tragedy. The colonists were unable to
find any profitable commodities and remained dependent on the Indians
and sporadic shipments from England for food. But then tobacco saved
Jamestown.
    By the time King James I described tobacco as a “noxious weed, . . .
loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to the brain, and dan-
gerous to the lungs,” it had already taken Europe by storm. In 1616 John
Rolfe crossed tobacco strains from Trinidad and Guiana and planted



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 4 cha pter 2


        Virginia’s first tobacco crop. In 1617 the colony sent its first cargo of to-
        bacco back to England. The “noxious weed,” a native of the New World,
        fetched a high price in Europe and the tobacco boom began in Virginia
        and then later spread to Maryland. Within fifteen years American colo-
        nists were exporting over five hundred thousand pounds of tobacco per
        year. Within forty years, they were exporting fifteen million.25
            Tobacco changed everything. It saved Virginia from ruin, incentivized
        further colonization, and laid the groundwork for what would become
        the United States. With a new market open, Virginia drew not only mer-
        chants and traders but also settlers. Colonists came in droves. They were
        mostly young, mostly male, and mostly indentured servants who signed
        contracts called indentures that bonded them to employers for a period
        of years in return for passage across the ocean. But even the rough terms
        of servitude were no match for the promise of land and potential profits
        that beckoned English farmers. But still there were not enough of them.
        Tobacco was a labor-intensive crop and ambitious planters, with seem-
        ingly limitless land before them, lacked only laborers to escalate their
        wealth and status. The colony’s great labor vacuum inspired the creation
        of the “headright policy” in 1618: any person who migrated to Virginia
        would automatically receive fifty acres of land and any immigrant whose
        passage they paid would entitle them to fifty acres more.
            In 1619, the Virginia Company established the House of Burgesses, a
        limited representative body composed of white landowners that first met
        in Jamestown. That same year, a Dutch slave ship sold twenty Africans
        to the Virginia colonists. Southern slavery was born.
            Soon the tobacco-growing colonists expanded beyond the bounds of
        Jamestown’s deadly peninsula. When it became clear that the English were
        not merely intent on maintaining a small trading post but sought a per-
        manent ever-expanding colony, conflict with the Powhatan Confederacy
        became almost inevitable. Powhatan died in 1622 and was succeeded by
        his brother, Opechancanough, who promised to drive the land-hungry col-
        onists back into the sea. He launched a surprise attack and in a single day
        (March 22, 1622) killed over 350 colonists, or one third of all the colonists
        in Virginia.26 The colonists retaliated and revisited the massacres on Indian
        settlements many times over. The massacre freed the colonists to drive the
        Indians off their land. The governor of Virginia declared it colonial policy
        to achieve the “expulsion of the savages to gain the free range of the coun-
        try.”27 War and disease destroyed the remnants of the Chesapeake Indians
        and tilted the balance of power decisively toward the English colonizers.



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  45


    English colonists brought to the New World particular visions of ra-
cial, cultural, and religious supremacy. Despite starving in the shadow
of the Powhatan Confederacy, English colonists nevertheless judged
themselves physically, spiritually, and technologically superior to Native
peoples in North America. Christianity, metallurgy, intensive agricul-
ture, transatlantic navigation, and even wheat all magnified the English
sense of superiority. This sense of superiority, when coupled with out-
breaks of violence, left the English feeling entitled to indigenous lands
and resources.
    Spanish conquerors established the framework for the Atlantic slave
trade over a century before the first chained Africans arrived at James-
town. Even Bartolomé de Las Casas, celebrated for his pleas to save Na-
tive Americans from colonial butchery, for a time recommended that
indigenous labor be replaced by importing Africans. Early English settlers
from the Caribbean and Atlantic coast of North America mostly imitated
European ideas of African inferiority. “Race” followed the expansion of
slavery across the Atlantic world. Skin color and race suddenly seemed
fixed. Englishmen equated Africans with categorical blackness and black-
ness with Sin, “the handmaid and symbol of baseness.”28 An English es-
sayist in 1695 wrote that “a negro will always be a negro, carry him to
Greenland, feed him chalk, feed and manage him never so many ways.”29
More and more Europeans embraced the notions that Europeans and
Africans were of distinct races. Others now preached that the Old Testa-
ment God cursed Ham, the son of Noah, and doomed black people to
perpetual enslavement.
    And yet in the early years of American slavery, ideas about race were
not yet fixed and the practice of slavery was not yet codified. The first
generations of Africans in English North America faced miserable condi-
tions, but, in contrast to later American history, their initial servitude
was not necessarily permanent, heritable, or even particularly disgrace-
ful. Africans were definitively set apart as fundamentally different from
their white counterparts and faced longer terms of service and harsher
punishments, but, like the indentured white servants whisked away from
English slums, these first Africans in North America could also work for
only a set number of years before becoming free landowners themselves.
The Angolan Anthony Johnson, for instance, was sold into servitude but
fulfilled his indenture and became a prosperous tobacco planter himself.30
    In 1622, at the dawn of the tobacco boom, Jamestown had still seemed
a failure. But the rise of tobacco and the destruction of the Powhatan



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 6 cha pter 2


                    turned the tide. Colonists escaped the deadly peninsula and immigrants
                    poured into the colony to grow tobacco and turn a profit for the Crown.


                    VI. New England
                    The English colonies in New England established from 1620 onward
                    were founded with loftier goals than those in Virginia. Although migrants
                    to New England expected economic profit, religious motives directed the
                    rhetoric and much of the reality of these colonies. Not every English per-
                    son who moved to New England during the seventeenth century was a
                    Puritan, but Puritans dominated the politics, religion, and culture of New
                    England. Even after 1700, the region’s Puritan inheritance shaped many
                    aspects of its history.
                        The term Puritan began as an insult, and its recipients usually referred
                    to each other as “the godly” if they used a specific term at all. Puritans be-
                    lieved that the Church of England did not distance itself far enough from
                    Catholicism after Henry VIII broke with Rome in the 1530s. They largely
                    agreed with European Calvinists—followers of theologian Jean Calvin—
                    on matters of religious doctrine. Calvinists (and Puritans) believed that
Seal of the Mas-    humankind was redeemed by God’s grace alone, and that the fate of
sachusetts Bay      an individual’s immortal soul was predestined. The happy minority that
Colony. The His-
tory Project (UC
                    God had already chosen to save were known among English Puritans as
Davis).             the Elect. Calvinists also argued that the decoration of churches, reliance




              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  47


on ornate ceremony, and corrupt priesthood obscured God’s message.
They believed that reading the Bible was the best way to understand God.
     Puritans were stereotyped by their enemies as dour killjoys, and the
exaggeration has endured. It is certainly true that the Puritans’ disdain
for excess and opposition to many holidays popular in Europe (includ-
ing Christmas, which, as Puritans never tired of reminding everyone, the
Bible never told anyone to celebrate) lent themselves to caricature. But
Puritans understood themselves as advocating a reasonable middle path
in a corrupt world. It would never occur to a Puritan, for example, to
abstain from alcohol or sex.
     During the first century after the English Reformation (c. 1530–1630)
Puritans sought to “purify” the Church of England of all practices that
smacked of Catholicism, advocating a simpler worship service, the abo-
lition of ornate churches, and other reforms. They had some success in
pushing the Church of England in a more Calvinist direction, but with
the coronation of King Charles I (r. 1625–1649), the Puritans gained an
implacable foe that cast English Puritans as excessive and dangerous.
Facing growing persecution, the Puritans began the Great Migration,
during which about twenty thousand people traveled to New England
between 1630 and 1640. The Puritans (unlike the small band of separat-
ist “Pilgrims” who founded Plymouth Colony in 1620) remained com-
mitted to reforming the Church of England but temporarily decamped
to North America to accomplish this task. Leaders like John Winthrop
insisted they were not separating from, or abandoning, England but were
rather forming a godly community in America that would be a “City on
a Hill” and an example for reformers back home.31 The Puritans did not
seek to create a haven of religious toleration, a notion that they—along
with nearly all European Christians—regarded as ridiculous at best and
dangerous at worst.
     While the Puritans did not succeed in building a godly utopia in New
England, a combination of Puritan traits with several external factors
created colonies wildly different from any other region settled by En­
glish people. Unlike those heading to Virginia, colonists in New Eng-
land (Plymouth [1620], Massachusetts Bay [1630], Connecticut [1636],
and Rhode Island [1636]) generally arrived in family groups. Most New
England immigrants were small landholders in England, a class contem-
porary English called the “middling sort.” When they arrived in New
England they tended to replicate their home environments, founding
towns composed of independent landholders. The New England climate



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 8 cha pter 2


        and soil made large-scale plantation agriculture impractical, so the sys-
        tem of large landholders using masses of slaves or indentured servants to
        grow labor-intensive crops never took hold.
            There is no evidence that the New England Puritans would have op-
        posed such a system were it possible; other Puritans made their fortunes
        on the Caribbean sugar islands, and New England merchants profited as
        suppliers of provisions and slaves to those colonies. By accident of geog-
        raphy as much as by design, New England society was much less strati-
        fied than any of Britain’s other seventeenth-century colonies.
            Although New England colonies could boast wealthy landholding
        elites, the disparity of wealth in the region remained narrow compared
        to the Chesapeake, Carolina, or the Caribbean. Instead, seventeenth-
        century New England was characterized by a broadly shared modest
        prosperity based on a mixed economy dependent on small farms, shops,
        fishing, lumber, shipbuilding, and trade with the Atlantic World.
            A combination of environmental factors and the Puritan social ethos
        produced a region of remarkable health and stability during the seven-
        teenth century. New England immigrants avoided most of the deadly
        outbreaks of tropical disease that turned the Chesapeake colonies into
        graveyards. Disease, in fact, only aided English settlement and relations
        to Native Americans. In contrast to other English colonists who had to
        contend with powerful Native American neighbors, the Puritans con-
        fronted the stunned survivors of a biological catastrophe. A lethal pan-
        demic of smallpox during the 1610s swept away as much as 90 percent
        of the region’s Native American population. Many survivors welcomed
        the English as potential allies against rival tribes who had escaped the
        catastrophe. The relatively healthy environment coupled with political
        stability and the predominance of family groups among early immigrants
        allowed the New England population to grow to 91,000 people by 1700
        from only 21,000 immigrants. In contrast, 120,000 English went to the
        Chesapeake, and only 85,000 white colonists remained in 1700.32
            The New England Puritans set out to build their utopia by creating
        communities of the godly. Groups of men, often from the same region of
        England, applied to the colony’s General Court for land grants.33 They
        generally divided part of the land for immediate use while keeping much
        of the rest as “commons” or undivided land for future generations. The
        town’s inhabitants collectively decided the size of each settler’s home
        lot based on their current wealth and status. Besides oversight of prop-
        erty, the town restricted membership, and new arrivals needed to apply



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  49


for admission. Those who gained admittance could participate in town
governments that, while not democratic by modern standards, neverthe-
less had broad popular involvement. All male property holders could
vote in town meetings and choose the selectmen, assessors, constables,
and other officials from among themselves to conduct the daily affairs
of government. Upon their founding, towns wrote covenants, reflect-
ing the Puritan belief in God’s covenant with his people. Towns sought
to arbitrate disputes and contain strife, as did the Church. Wayward
or divergent individuals were persuaded, corrected, or coerced. Popu-
lar conceptions of Puritans as hardened authoritarians are exaggerated,
but if persuasion and arbitration failed, people who did not conform to
community norms were punished or removed. Massachusetts banished
Anne Hutchinson, Roger Williams, and other religious dissenters like
the Quakers.
    Although by many measures colonization in New England succeeded,
its Puritan leaders failed in their own mission to create a utopian com-
munity that would inspire their fellows back in England. They tended
to focus their disappointment on the younger generation. “But alas!”
Increase Mather lamented, “That so many of the younger Generation
have so early corrupted their [the founders’] doings!”34 The jeremiad,
a sermon lamenting the fallen state of New England due to its straying
from its early virtuous path, became a staple of late-seventeenth-century
Puritan literature.
    Yet the jeremiad could not stop the effects of prosperity. The popula-
tion spread and grew more diverse. Many, if not most, New Englanders
retained strong ties to their Calvinist roots into the eighteenth century,
but the Puritans (who became Congregationalists) struggled against a
rising tide of religious pluralism. On December 25, 1727, Judge Samuel
Sewell noted in his diary that a new Anglican minister “keeps the day in
his new Church at Braintrey: people flock thither.”35 Previously forbid-
den holidays like Christmas were celebrated publicly in church and pri-
vately in homes. Puritan divine Cotton Mather discovered on Christmas
1711 that “a number of young people of both sexes, belonging, many of
them, to my flock, had . . . a Frolick, a reveling Feast, and a Ball, which
discovers their Corruption.”36
    Despite the lamentations of the Mathers and other Puritan leaders
of their failure, they left an enduring mark on New England culture and
society that endured long after the region’s residents ceased to be called
“Puritan.”



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
5 0 cha pter 2



        VII. Conclusion
        The fledgling settlements in Virginia and Massachusetts paled in impor-
        tance when compared to the sugar colonies of the Caribbean. Valued
        more as marginal investments and social safety valves where the poor
        could be released, these colonies nonetheless created a foothold for Brit-
        ain on a vast North American continent. And although the seventeenth
        century would be fraught for Britain—religious, social, and political up-
        heavals would behead one king and force another to flee his throne—
        settlers in Massachusetts and Virginia were nonetheless tied together by
        the emerging Atlantic economy. While commodities such as tobacco and
        sugar fueled new markets in Europe, the economy grew increasingly de-
        pendent on slave labor. Enslaved Africans transported across the Atlantic
        would further complicate the collision of cultures in the Americas. The
        creation and maintenance of a slave system would spark new understand-
        ings of human difference and new modes of social control. The economic
        exchanges of the new Atlantic economy would not only generate great
        wealth and exploitation, they would also lead to new cultural systems
        and new identities for the inhabitants of at least four continents.


        VIII. Reference Materials
        This chapter was edited by Ben Wright and Joseph Locke, with content contribu-
        tions by Erin Bonuso, L. D. Burnett, Jon Grandage, Joseph Locke, Lisa Mercer,
        Maria Montalvo, Ian Saxine, Jennifer Tellman, Luke Willert, and Ben Wright.
            Recommended citation: Erin Bonuso et al., “Colliding Cultures,” Ben Wright
        and Joseph L. Locke, eds., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph L. Locke and Ben
        Wright (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

        Notes to Ch a p ter 2
            1. Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman, eds., The Cambridge Eco-
        nomic History of the United States, Vol. I: The Colonial Era (New York: Cam-
        bridge University Press, 1996), 21.
            2. Andrew L. Knaut, The Pueblo Revolt of 1680: Conquest and Resistance
        in Seventeenth Century New Mexico (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,
        2015), 46.
            3. John E. Kicza and Rebecca Horn, Resilient Cultures: America’s Native
        Peoples Confront European Colonization, 1500–1800 (New York: Routledge,
        2013), 122.
            4. Knaut, Pueblo Revolt of 1680, 155.
            5. John Ponet, A Short Treatise on Political Power: And of the True Obedi-
        ence Which Subjects Owe to Kings, and Other Civil Governors (London: s.n.),
        43–44.

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  51


     6. Alan Greer, The People of New France (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1997).
     7. Susan Sleeper-Smith, Indian Women and French Men: Rethinking Cul-
tural Encounter in the Western Great Lakes (Amherst: University of Massachu-
setts Press, 2001).
     8. Carole Blackburn, Harvest of Souls: The Jesuit Missions and Colonial-
ism in North America, 1632–1659 (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press,
2000), 116.
     9. Richard White, The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in
the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815 (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1991).
     10. Evan Haefeli, New Netherland and the Dutch Origins of American Re-
ligious Liberty (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2012), 20–53.
     11. Allen W. Trelease, Indian Affairs in Colonial New York: The Seventeenth
Century (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1997), 36.
     12. Daniel K. Richter, Trade, Land, Power: The Struggle for Eastern North
America (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013), 101.
     13. Janny Venema, Beverwijck: A Dutch Village on the American Frontier,
1652–1664 (Albany: SUNY Press, 2003).
     14. Leslie M. Harris, In the Shadow of Slavery: African Americans in New
York City, 1626–1863 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 21.
     15. Alida C. Metcalf, Go-betweens and the Colonization of Brazil: 1500–
1600 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2005). See also James H. Sweet, Rec-
reating Africa: Culture, Kinship, and Religion in the African-Portuguese World,
1441–1770 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.
     16. Edmund S. Morgan, American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal
of Colonial Virginia (New York: Norton, 1975), 30.
     17. John Walter, Crowds and Popular Politics in Early Modern England
(Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 2006), 131–135.
     18. Christopher Hodgkins, Reforming Empire: Protestant Colonialism and
Conscience in British Literature (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 2002), 15.
     19. Richard Hakluyt, Discourse on Western Planting (1584). https://​archive​
.org/​details/​discourseonweste02hakl​_0.
     20. Morgan, American Slavery, American Freedom, 9.
     21. Felipe Fernández-Armesto, The Spanish Armada: The Experience of War
in 1588 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
     22. John Smith, Advertisements for the Inexperienced Planters of New En­
gland, or Anywhere or The Pathway to Experience to Erect a Plantation (Lon-
don: Haviland, 1631), 16.
     23. George Percy, “A True Relation of the Proceedings and Occurrents of
Moment Which Have Hap’ned in Virginia,” quoted in Jamestown Narratives:
Eyewitness Accounts of the Virginia Colony, the First Decade, 1607–1617, ed.
Edward Wright Haile (Champlain, VA: Round House, 1998), 505.
     24. Eric A. Powell, “Chilling Discovery at Jamestown,” Archaeology (June
10, 2013). http://​www​.archaeology​.org/​issues/​96​-1307/​trenches/​973​-jamestown​
-starving​-time​-cannibalism.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
5 2 cha pter 2


            25. Dennis Montgomery, 1607: Jamestown and the New World (Williams-
        burg, VA: Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, 2007), 126.
            26. Rebecca Goetz, The Baptism of Early Virginia: How Christianity Cre-
        ated Race (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012), 57.
            27. Daniel K. Richter, Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of
        Early America (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), 75.
            28. Winthrop Jordan, White over Black: American Attitudes Toward the
        Negro, 1550–12 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1968), 7.
            29. Ibid., 16.
            30. T. H. Breen and Stephen Innes, “Myne Owne Ground”: Race and Free-
        dom on Virginia’s Eastern Shore, 1640–1676 (New York: Oxford University
        Press, 2005).
            31. John Winthrop, A Modell of Christian Charity (1830), first published in
        Collections of the Massachusetts Historical Society (Boston, 1838), 3rd series,
        no. 7: 31–48. http://​history​.hanover​.edu/​texts/​winthmod​.html.
            32. Alan Taylor, American Colonies: The Settling of North America (New
        York: Penguin, 2002), 170.
            33. Virginia DeJohn Anderson, New England’s Generation: The Great Mi-
        gration and the Formation of Society and Culture in the Seventeenth Century
        (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 90–91.
            34. Increase Mather, A Testimony Against Several Prophane and Supersti-
        tious Customs, Now Practised by Some in New-England (London: s.n., 1687).
            35. Samuel Sewall, Diary of Samuel Sewall: 1674–1729, Vol. 3 (Boston:
        Massachusetts Historical Society, 1882), 389.
            36. Diary of Cotton Mather, 1709–1724 (Boston: Massachusetts Historical
        Society, 1912), 146.

        R e c o mm e n d e d R e a di n g
        Armitage, David, and Michael J. Braddick, eds. The British Atlantic World,
            1500–1800. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
        Barr, Juliana. Peace Came in the Form of a Woman: Indians and Spaniards in the
            Texas Borderlands. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009.
        Blackburn, Robin. The Making of New World Slavery: From the Baroque to the
            Modern, 1492–1800. London: Verso, 1997.
        Calloway, Colin G. New Worlds for All: Indians, Europeans, and the Remaking
            of Early America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
        Cañizares-Esguerra, Jorge. Puritan Conquistadors. Iberianizing the Atlantic,
            1550–1700. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2006.
        Cronon, William. Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of
            New England. New York: Hill and Wang, 1983.
        Daniels, Christine, and Michael V. Kennedy, eds. Negotiated Empires: Centers
            and Peripheries in the Americas, 1500–1820. New York: Routledge, 2002.
        Dubcovsky, Alejandra. Informed Power: Communication in the Early American
            South. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016.
        Elliott, John H. Empires of the Atlantic World: Britain and Spain in America,
            1492–1830. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol l i di ng Cu l t u r e s  53


Fuentes, Marisa J. Dispossessed Lives: Enslaved Women, Violence, and the Ar-
    chive. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016.
Goetz, Rebecca Anne. The Baptism of Early Virginia: How Christianity Created
    Race. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012.
Gould, Eliga H. “Entangled Histories, Entangled Worlds: The English-Speaking
    Atlantic as a Spanish Periphery.” American Historical Review 112, no. 3
    (June 2007): 764-786.
Grandjean, Katherine. American Passage: The Communications Frontier in Early
    New England. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.
Mancall, Peter C. Hakluyt’s Promise: An Elizabethan’s Obsession for an English
    America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007.
Morgan, Edmund S. American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colo-
    nial Virginia. New York: Norton, 1975.
Morgan, Jennifer. Laboring Women: Reproduction and Gender in New World
    Slavery. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004.
Reséndez, Andrés. The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslave-
    ment in America. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017.
Seed, Patricia. Ceremonies of Possession in Europe’s Conquest of the New World,
    1492–1640. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Snyder, Christina. Slavery in Indian Country: The Changing Face of Captivity in
    Early America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Socolow, Susan Migden. The Women of Colonial Latin America. New York:
    Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Stoler, Ann Laura. “Tense and Tender Ties: The Politics of Comparison in North
    American History and (Post) Colonial Studies.” Journal of American History
    88, no. 3 (December 2001): 829–897.
Thornton, John. Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400–
    1800. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Warren, Wendy. New England Bound: Slavery and Colonization in Early Amer-
    ica. New York: Norton, 2016.
Weimer, Adrian. Martyrs’ Mirror: Persecution and Holiness in Early New Eng-
    land. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
White, Richard. The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the
    Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815. New York: Cambridge University Press,
    1991.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3
British North America

I. Introduction
Whether they came as servants, slaves, free farmers, religious refugees,       Unidentified
                                                                               artist, The Old
or powerful planters, the men and women of the American colonies               Plantation, c.
created new worlds. Native Americans saw fledgling settlements grow            1790–1800,
into unstoppable beachheads of vast new populations that increasingly          Abby Aldrich
                                                                               Rockefeller Folk
mono­polized resources and remade the land into something else entirely.       Art Museum.
Meanwhile, as colonial societies developed in the seventeenth and eigh-        Wikimedia.

teenth centuries, fluid labor arrangements and racial categories solidified
into the race-based, chattel slavery that increasingly defined the economy
of the British Empire. The North American mainland originally occupied
a small and marginal place in that broad empire, as even the output of its
most prosperous colonies paled before the tremendous wealth of Carib-
bean sugar islands. And yet the colonial backwaters on the North Ameri-
can mainland, ignored by many imperial officials, were nevertheless
deeply tied into these larger Atlantic networks. A new and increasingly
complex Atlantic World connected the continents of Europe, Africa, and
the Americas.


              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  55


    Events across the ocean continued to influence the lives of American
colonists. Civil war, religious conflict, and nation building transformed
seventeenth-century Britain and remade societies on both sides of the
ocean. At the same time, colonial settlements grew and matured, devel-
oping into powerful societies capable of warring against Native Ameri-
cans and subduing internal upheaval. Patterns and systems established
during the colonial era would continue to shape American society for
centuries. And none, perhaps, would be as brutal and destructive as the
institution of slavery.


II. Slavery and the Making of Race
After his arrival as a missionary in Charles Town, Carolina, in 1706,
Reverend Francis Le Jau quickly grew disillusioned by the horrors of
American slavery. He met enslaved Africans ravaged by the Middle Pas-
sage, Indians traveling south to enslave enemy villages, and colonists ter-
rified of invasions from French Louisiana and Spanish Florida. Slavery
and death surrounded him.
     Le Jau’s strongest complaints were reserved for his own countrymen,
the English. English traders encouraged wars with Indians in order to
purchase and enslave captives, and planters justified the use of an en-
slaved workforce by claiming white servants were “good for nothing at
all.” Although the minister thought otherwise and baptized and educated
a substantial number of slaves, he was unable to overcome masters’ fear
that Christian baptism would lead to slave emancipation.1
     The 1660s marked a turning point for black men and women in Eng-
lish colonies like Virginia in North America and Barbados in the West
Indies. New laws gave legal sanction to the enslavement of people of
African descent for life. The permanent deprivation of freedom and the
separate legal status of enslaved Africans facilitated the maintenance of
strict racial barriers. Skin color became more than a superficial differ-
ence; it became the marker of a transcendent, all-encompassing division
between two distinct peoples, two races, white and black.2
     All seventeenth-century racial thought did not point directly toward
modern classifications of racial hierarchy. Captain Thomas Phillips, mas-
ter of a slave ship in 1694, did not justify his work with any such creed: “I
can’t think there is any intrinsic value in one color more than another, nor
that white is better than black, only we think it so because we are so.”3 For
Phillips, the profitability of slavery was the only justification he needed.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
56                                                                         ch a pter 3


                Wars offered the most common means for colonists to acquire Native
            American slaves. Seventeenth-century European legal thought held that
            enslaving prisoners of war was not only legal but more merciful than kill-
            ing the captives outright. After the Pequot War (1636–1637), Massachu-
            setts Bay colonists sold hundreds of North American Indians into slavery
            in the West Indies. A few years later, Dutch colonists in New Netherland
            (New York and New Jersey) enslaved Algonquian Indians during both
            Governor Kieft’s War (1641–1645) and the two Esopus Wars (1659–
            1663). The Dutch sent these war captives to English-settled Bermuda
            as well as Curaçao, a Dutch plantation colony in the southern Carib-
            bean. An even larger number of Indian slaves were captured during King
            Philip’s War (1675–1676), a pan-Indian uprising against the encroach-
            ments of the New England colonies. Hundreds of Indians were bound
            and shipped into slavery. The New England colonists also tried to send
            Indian slaves to Barbados, but the Barbados Assembly refused to import
            the New England Indians for fear they would encourage rebellion.
                In the eighteenth century, wars in Florida, South Carolina, and the
            Mississippi Valley produced even more Indian slaves. Some wars emerged
            from contests between Indians and colonists for land, while others were
            manufactured as pretenses for acquiring captives. Some were not wars
            at all but merely illegal raids performed by slave traders. Historians es-
            timate that between 24,000 and 51,000 Native Americans were forced
            into slavery throughout the southern colonies between 1670 and 1715.4
            While some of the enslaved Indians remained in the region, many were
            exported through Charles Town, South Carolina, to other ports in the
            British Atlantic—most likely to Barbados, Jamaica, and Bermuda. Many
            of the English colonists who wished to claim land in frontier territories
            were threatened by the violence inherent in the Indian slave trade. By the
            eighteenth century, colonial governments often discouraged the practice,
            although it never ceased entirely as long as slavery was, in general, a legal
            institution.
                Native American slaves died quickly, mostly from disease, but others
            were murdered or died from starvation. The demands of growing planta-
            tion economies required a more reliable labor force, and the transatlantic
            slave trade provided such a workforce. European slavers transported mil-
            lions of Africans across the ocean in a terrifying journey known as the
            Middle Passage. Writing at the end of the eighteenth century, Olaudah
            Equiano recalled the fearsomeness of the crew, the filth and gloom of the
            hold, the inadequate provisions allotted for the captives, and the despera-



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  57


tion that drove some slaves to suicide. (Equiano claimed to have been
born in Igboland in modern-day Nigeria, but he may have been born
in colonial South Carolina, where he collected memories of the Middle
Passage from African-born slaves.) In the same time period, Alexander
Falconbridge, a slave ship surgeon, described the sufferings of slaves from
shipboard infections and close quarters in the hold. Dysentery, known
as “the bloody flux,” left captives lying in pools of excrement. Chained
in small spaces in the hold, slaves could lose so much skin and flesh
from chafing against metal and timber that their bones protruded. Other
sources detailed rapes, whippings, and diseases like smallpox and con-
junctivitis aboard slave ships.5
    “Middle” had various meanings in the Atlantic slave trade. For the
captains and crews of slave ships, the Middle Passage was one leg in the
maritime trade in sugar and other semifinished American goods, manu-
factured European commodities, and African slaves. For the enslaved Af-
ricans, the Middle Passage was the middle leg of three distinct journeys
from Africa to the Americas. First was an overland journey in Africa to a
coastal slave-trading factory, often a trek of hundreds of miles. ­Second—
and middle—was an oceanic trip lasting from one to six months in a




                                                          Slave ships transported 11–12 million Af-
                                                          ricans to destinations in North and South
                                                          America, but it was not until the end of
                                                          the 18th century that any regulation was
                                                          introduced. The Brookes print dates to
                                                          after the Regulated Slave Trade Act of
                                                          1788, but still shows enslaved Africans
                                                          chained in rows using iron leg shackles.
                                                          The slave ship Brookes was allowed to
                                                          carry up to 454 slaves, allotting 6 feet
                                                          (1.8 m) by 1 foot 4 inches (0.41 m) to
                                                          each man; 5 feet 10 inches (1.78 m) by
                                                          1 foot 4 inches (0.41 m) to each woman,
                                                          and 5 feet (1.5 m) by 1 foot 2 inches
                                                          (0.36 m) to each child, but one slave
                                                          trader alleged that before 1788, the ship
                                                          carried as many as 609 slaves. Stowage of
                                                          the British slave ship Brookes under the
                                                          regulated slave trade act of 1788, 1789.
                                                          Wikimedia.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
58                                                                          ch a pter 3


             s­laver. Third was acculturation (known as “seasoning”) and transpor-
              tation to the American mine, plantation, or other location where new
              slaves were forced to labor.
                  The impact of the Middle Passage on the cultures of the Americas
              remains evident today. Many foods associated with Africans, such as
              cassava, were originally imported to West Africa as part of the slave
              trade and were then adopted by African cooks before being brought to
              the Americas, where they are still consumed. West African rhythms and
              melodies live in new forms today in music as varied as religious spirituals
              and synthesized drumbeats. African influences appear in the basket mak-
              ing and language of the Gullah people on the Carolina coastal islands.
                  Recent estimates count between eleven and twelve million Africans
              forced across the Atlantic between the sixteenth and nineteenth centu-
              ries, with about two million deaths at sea as well as an additional several
              million dying in the trade’s overland African leg or during seasoning.6
              Conditions in all three legs of the slave trade were horrible, but the first
              abolitionists focused especially on the abuses of the Middle Passage.
                  Southern European trading empires like the Catalans and Aragonese
              were brought into contact with a Levantine commerce in sugar and slaves
              in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Europeans made the first steps
              toward an Atlantic slave trade in the 1440s when Portuguese sailors
              landed in West Africa in search of gold, spices, and allies against the
              Muslims who dominated Mediterranean trade. Beginning in the 1440s,
              ship captains carried African slaves to Portugal. These Africans were val-
              ued primarily as domestic servants, as peasants provided the primary
              agricultural labor force in Western Europe.7 European expansion into
            the Americas introduced both settlers and European authorities to a new
            ­situation—an abundance of land and a scarcity of labor. Portuguese,
             Dutch, and English ships became the conduits for Africans forced to
             America. The western coast of Africa, the Gulf of Guinea, and the west-
             central coast were the sources of African captives. Wars of expansion and
             raiding parties produced captives who could be sold in coastal factories.
             African slave traders bartered for European finished goods such as beads,
             cloth, rum, firearms, and metal wares.
                  Slavers often landed in the British West Indies, where slaves were sea-
            soned in places like Barbados. Charleston, South Carolina, became the
            leading entry point for the slave trade on the mainland. The founding of
            Charleston (“Charles Town” until the 1780s) in 1670 was viewed as a se-
            rious threat by the Spanish in neighboring Florida, who began construc-



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  59




The first trading post built on the Gulf of Guinea and the oldest European building southern of the Sahara,
Elmina Castle was established as a trade settlement by the Portuguese in the fifteenth century. The fort be-
came one of the largest and most important markets for African slaves along the Atlantic slave trade. “View
of the castle of Elmina on the north-west side, seen from the river. Located on the gold coast in Guinea,” in
Atlas Blaeu van der Hem, c. 1665–1668. Wikimedia.

tion of Castillo de San Marcos in St. Augustine as a response. In 1693
the Spanish king issued the Decree of Sanctuary, which granted freedom
to slaves fleeing the English colonies if they converted to Catholicism and
swore an oath of loyalty to Spain.8 The presence of Africans who bore
arms and served in the Spanish militia testifies to the different concep-
tions of race among the English and Spanish in America.
    About 450,000 Africans landed in British North America, a relatively
small portion of the eleven to twelve million victims of the trade.9 As a
proportion of the enslaved population, there were more enslaved women
in North America than in other colonial slave populations. Enslaved Af-
rican women also bore more children than their counterparts in the Ca-
ribbean or South America, facilitating the natural reproduction of slaves
on the North American continent.10 A 1662 Virginia law stated that an
enslaved woman’s children inherited the “condition” of their mother;



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
60                                                                          ch a pter 3


            other colonies soon passed similar statutes.11 This economic strategy on
            the part of planters created a legal system in which all children born to
            slave women would be slaves for life, whether the father was white or
            black, enslaved or free.
                Most fundamentally, the emergence of modern notions of race was
            closely related to the colonization of the Americas and the slave trade.
            African slave traders lacked a firm category of race that might have led
            them to think that they were selling their own people, in much the same
            way that Native Americans did not view other Indian groups as part of
            the same “race.” Similarly, most English citizens felt no racial identifica-
            tion with the Irish or the even the Welsh. The modern idea of race as an
            inherited physical difference (most often skin color) that is used to sup-
            port systems of oppression was new in the early modern Atlantic world.
                In the early years of slavery, especially in the South, the distinction be-
            tween indentured servants and slaves was initially unclear. In 1643, how-
            ever, a law was passed in Virginia that made African women “tithable.”12
            This, in effect, associated African women’s work with difficult agricultural
            labor. There was no similar tax levied on white women; the law was an
            attempt to distinguish white women from African women. The English
            ideal was to have enough hired hands and servants working on a farm so
            that wives and daughters did not have to partake in manual labor. Instead,
            white women were expected to labor in dairy sheds, small gardens, and
            kitchens. Of course, because of the labor shortage in early America, white
            women did participate in field labor. But this idealized gendered division
            of labor contributed to the English conceiving of themselves as better than
            other groups who did not divide labor in this fashion, including the West
            Africans arriving in slave ships to the colonies. For many white colonists,
            the association of a gendered division of labor with Englishness provided
            a further justification for the enslavement and subordination of Africans.
                Ideas about the rule of the household were informed by legal and
            customary understandings of marriage and the home in England. A man
            was expected to hold “paternal dominion” over his household, which in-
            cluded his wife, children, servants, and slaves. In contrast, slaves were not
            legally masters of a household and were therefore subject to the authority
            of the white master. Slave marriages were not recognized in colonial law.
            Some enslaved men and women married “abroad”; that is, they married
            individuals who were not owned by the same master and did not live on
            the same plantation. These husbands and wives had to travel miles at a
            time, typically only once a week on Sundays, to visit their spouses. Legal



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  61


or religious authority did not protect these marriages, and masters could
refuse to let their slaves visit a spouse, or even sell a slave to a new master
hundreds of miles away from their spouse and children. Within the patri-
archal and exploitative colonial environment, enslaved men and women
struggled to establish families and communities.


III. Turmoil in Britain
Religious conflict plagued sixteenth-century England. While Spain plun-
dered the New World and built an empire, Catholic and Protestant English
monarchs vied for supremacy and attacked their opponents as heretics.
Queen Elizabeth cemented Protestantism as the official religion of the
realm, but questions endured as to what kind of Protestantism would
hold sway. Many radical Protestants (often called “Puritans” by their
critics) looked to the New World as an opportunity to create a beacon of
Calvinist Christianity, while others continued the struggle in England. By
the 1640s, political and economic conflicts between Parliament and the
Crown merged with long-simmering religious tensions, made worse by a
king who seemed sympathetic to Catholicism. The result was a bloody
civil war. Colonists reacted in a variety of ways as England waged war on
itself, but all were affected by these decades of turmoil.
    Between 1629 and 1640 the absolute rule of Charles I caused con-
siderable friction between the English Parliament and the king. Conflict
erupted in 1640 when a Parliament called by Charles refused to grant
him subsidies to suppress a rebellion in Scotland. The Irish rebelled the
following year, and by 1642 strained relations between Charles and Par-
liament led to civil war in England. In 1649 Parliament won, Charles I
was executed, and England became a republic and protectorate under
Oliver Cromwell. These changes redefined England’s relationship with its
American colonies, as the new government under Cromwell attempted to
consolidate its hold over its overseas territories.
    In 1642, no permanent British North American colony was more than
thirty-five years old. The Crown and various proprietors controlled most
of the colonies, but settlers from Barbados to Maine enjoyed a great deal
of independence. This was especially true in Massachusetts Bay, where
Puritan settlers governed themselves according to the colony’s 1629 char-
ter. Trade in tobacco and naval stores tied the colonies to England eco-
nomically, as did religion and political culture, but in general the English
government left the colonies to their own devices.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
62                                                                                           ch a pter 3


                           The English Revolution of the 1640s forced settlers in America to
                       reconsider their place within the empire. Older colonies like Virginia and
                       proprietary colonies like Maryland sympathized with the Crown. Newer
                       colonies like Massachusetts Bay, populated by religious dissenters taking
                       part in the Great Migration of the 1630s, tended to favor Parliament. Yet
                       during the war the colonies remained neutral, fearing that support for
                       either side could involve them in war. Even Massachusetts Bay, which
                       nurtured ties to radical Protestants in Parliament, remained neutral.
                           Charles’s execution in 1649 challenged American neutrality. Six colo-
                       nies, including Virginia and Barbados, declared allegiance to the dead
                       monarch’s son, Charles II. Parliament responded with an act in 1650 that
                       leveled an economic embargo on the rebelling colonies, forcing them to
                       accept Parliament’s authority. Parliament argued that America had been
                       “planted at the Cost, and settled” by the English nation, and that it, as
                       the embodiment of that commonwealth, possessed ultimate jurisdiction




King Charles I, pictured with the blue sash of the Order of the Garter, listens to his commanders detail the
strategy for what would be the first pitched battle of the First English Civil War. As all previous constitu-
tional compromises between King Charles and Parliament had broken down, both sides raised large armies
in the hopes of forcing the other side to concede their position. The Battle of Edgehill ended with no clear
winner, leading to a prolonged war of over four years and an even longer series of wars (known generally
as the English Civil War) that eventually established the Commonwealth of England in 1649. Charles Land-
seer, The Eve of the Battle of Edge Hill,1642, 1845. Wikimedia.



                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  63




England found itself in crisis after the death of Oliver Cromwell in 1658, leading in time to the reestablish-
ment of the monarchy. On his thirtieth birthday (May 29, 1660), Charles II sailed from the Netherlands
to his restoration after nine years in exile. He was received in London to great acclaim, as depicted in this
contemporary painting. Lieve Verschuler, The Arrival of King Charles II of England in Rotterdam, 24 May
1660. c. 1660–1665. Wikimedia.



over the colonies.13 It followed up the embargo with the Navigation Act
of 1651, which compelled merchants in every colony to ship goods di-
rectly to England in English ships. Parliament sought to bind the colonies
more closely to England and prevent other European nations, especially
the Dutch, from interfering with its American possessions.
    The monarchy was restored with Charles II, but popular suspicions
of the Crown’s Catholic and French sympathies lingered. Charles II’s sup-
pression of the religious and press freedoms that flourished during the
civil war years demonstrated the Crown’s desire to reimpose order and
royal rule. But it was the openly Catholic and pro-French policies of his
successor, James II, that once again led to the overthrow of the monarchy
in 1688. In that year a group of bishops and Parliamentarians offered the
English throne to the Dutch Prince William of Holland and his English
bride, Mary, the daughter of James II. This relatively peaceful coup was
called the Glorious Revolution.
    In the decades before the Glorious Revolution, English colonists ex-
perienced religious and political conflict that reflected transformations in
Europe as well as distinctly colonial conditions. In the 1670s and early
1680s, King Charles II tightened English control over North America



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
64                                                                         ch a pter 3


            and the West Indies through the creation of new colonies, the imposi-
            tion of new Navigation Acts, and the establishment of a new executive
            council called the Lords of Trade and Plantations.14 As imperial officials
            attempted to curb colonists’ autonomy, threats from Native Americans
            and New France on the continent led many colonists to believe that In-
            dians and Catholics sought to destroy English America. In New England
            an uprising beginning in 1675 led by the Wampanoag leader Metacom,
            or King Philip as the English called him, seemed to confirm these fears.
            Indian conflicts helped trigger the revolt against royal authorities known
            as Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia the following year.
                James II worked to place the colonies on firmer administrative and
            defensive footing by creating the Dominion of New England in 1686.
            The Dominion consolidated the New England colonies, New York, and
            New Jersey into one administrative unit to counter French Canada, but
            colonists strongly resented the loss of their individual provinces. The
            Dominion’s governor, Sir Edmund Andros, did little to assuage fears of
            arbitrary power when he forced colonists into military service for a cam-
            paign against the Maine Indians in early 1687. Impressment into military
            service was a long-standing grievance among English commoners that
            was transplanted to the colonies.
                In England, James II’s push for religious toleration of Catholics and
            dissenters brought him into conflict with Parliament and the Anglican
            establishment in England. After the 1688 invasion by the Protestant Wil-
            liam of Orange, James II fled to France. When colonists learned imperial
            officials in Boston and New York City attempted to keep news of the Glo-
            rious Revolution secret, simmering hostilities toward provincial leaders
            burst into the open. In Massachusetts, New York, and Maryland, colonists
            overthrew colonial governments as local social antagonisms fused with
            popular animosity toward imperial rule. Colonists in America quickly de-
            clared allegiance to the new monarchs. They did so in part to maintain
            order in their respective colonies. As one Virginia official explained, if
            there was “no King in England, there was no Government here.”15 A dec-
            laration of allegiance was therefore a means toward stability.
                More importantly, colonists declared for William and Mary because
            they believed that their ascension marked the rejection of absolutism
            and confirmed the centrality of Protestantism and liberty in English life.
            Settlers joined in the revolution by overthrowing the Dominion govern-
            ment, restoring the provinces to their previous status, and forcing out
            the Catholic-dominated Maryland government. They launched several



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  65


assaults against French Canada as part of King William’s War and re-
joiced in Parliament’s 1689 passage of a Bill of Rights, which curtailed
the power of the monarchy and cemented Protestantism in England. For
English colonists, it was indeed a “glorious” revolution as it united them
in a Protestant empire that stood counter to Catholic tyranny, absolut-
ism, and French power.


IV. New Colonies
Despite the turmoil in Britain, colonial settlement grew considerably
throughout the seventeenth century, and several new settlements joined
the two original colonies of Virginia and Massachusetts.
    In 1632, Charles I set a tract of about 12 million acres of land at the
northern tip of the Chesapeake Bay aside for a second colony in America.
Named for the new monarch’s queen, Maryland was granted to Charles’s
friend and political ally, Cecilius Calvert, the second Lord Baltimore.
Calvert hoped to gain additional wealth from the colony, as well as to
create a haven for fellow Catholics. In England, many of that faith found
themselves harassed by the Protestant majority and more than a few con-
sidered migrating to America. Charles I, a Catholic sympathizer, was in
favor of Lord Baltimore’s plan to create a colony that would demonstrate
that Catholics and Protestants could live together peacefully.
    In late 1633, both Protestant and Catholic settlers left England for
the Chesapeake, arriving in Maryland in March 1634. Men of middling
means found greater opportunities in Maryland, which prospered as a
tobacco colony without the growing pains suffered by Virginia.
    Unfortunately, Lord Baltimore’s hopes of a diverse Christian colony
were thwarted. Most colonists were Protestants relocating from Vir-
ginia. Many of these Protestants were radical Quakers and Puritans who
were frustrated with Virginia’s efforts to force adherence to the Anglican
Church, also known as the Church of England. In 1650, Puritans re-
volted, setting up a new government that prohibited both Catholicism
and Anglicanism. Governor William Stone attempted to put down the
revolt in 1655 but was not successful until 1658. Two years after the
Glorious Revolution (1688–1689), the Calverts lost control of Maryland
and the province became a royal colony.
    Religion was a motivating factor in the creation of several other
colonies as well, including the New England colonies of Connecti-
cut and Rhode Island. The settlements that would eventually compose



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
66                                                                         ch a pter 3


            ­ onnecticut grew out of settlements in Saybrook and New Haven.
            C
            Thomas Hooker and his congregation left Massachusetts for Connecti-
            cut because the area around Boston was becoming increasingly crowded.
            The Connecticut River Valley was large enough for more cattle and ag-
            riculture. In June 1636, Hooker led one hundred people and a variety of
            livestock in settling an area they called Newtown (later Hartford).
                 New Haven Colony had a more directly religious origin, as the found-
            ers attempted a new experiment in Puritanism. In 1638, John Davenport,
            Theophilus Eaton, and other supporters of the Puritan faith settled in the
            Quinnipiac (New Haven) area of the Connecticut River Valley. In 1643
            New Haven Colony was officially organized, with Eaton named gover-
            nor. In the early 1660s, three men who had signed the death warrant for
            Charles I were concealed in New Haven. This did not win the colony
            any favors, and it became increasingly poorer and weaker. In 1665, New
            Haven was absorbed into Connecticut, but its singular religious tradition
            endured with the creation of Yale College.
                 Religious radicals similarly founded Rhode Island. After his exile
            from Massachusetts, Roger Williams created a settlement called Provi-
            dence in 1636. He negotiated for the land with the local Narragansett
            sachems Canonicus and Miantonomi. Williams and his fellow settlers
            agreed on an egalitarian constitution and established religious and po-
            litical freedom in the colony. The following year, another Massachusetts
            exile, Anne Hutchinson, and her followers settled near Providence. Oth-
            ers soon arrived, and the colony was granted a charter by Parliament in
            1644. Persistently independent and with republican sympathies, the set-
            tlers refused a governor and instead elected a president and council. These
            separate communities passed laws abolishing witchcraft trials, imprison-
            ment for debt and, in 1652, chattel slavery. Because of the colony’s policy
            of toleration, it became a haven for Quakers, Jews, and other persecuted
            religious groups. In 1663, Charles II granted the colony a royal charter
            establishing the colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations.
                 Until the middle of the seventeenth century, the English neglected the
            area between Virginia and New England despite obvious environmental
            advantages. The climate was healthier than the Chesapeake and more
            temperate than New England. The mid-Atlantic had three highly naviga-
            ble rivers: the Susquehanna, the Delaware, and the Hudson. The Swedes
            and Dutch established their own colonies in the region: New Sweden in
            the Delaware Valley and New Netherland in the Hudson Valley.
                 Compared to other Dutch colonies around the globe, the settlements
            on the Hudson River were relatively minor. The Dutch West India Com-

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  67


pany realized that in order to secure its fur trade in the area, it needed
to establish a greater presence in New Netherland. Toward this end, the
company formed New Amsterdam on Manhattan Island in 1625.
     Although the Dutch extended religious tolerance to those who settled
in New Netherland, the population remained small. This left the colony
vulnerable to English attack during the 1650s and 1660s, resulting in
the handover of New Netherland to England in 1664. The new colony
of New York was named for the proprietor, James, the Duke of York,
brother to Charles II and funder of the expedition against the Dutch in
1664. New York was briefly reconquered by the Netherlands in 1667,
and class and ethnic conflicts in New York City contributed to the rebel-
lion against English authorities during the Glorious Revolution of 1688–
1689. Colonists of Dutch ancestry resisted assimilation into English
culture well into the eighteenth century, prompting New York Anglicans
to note that the colony was “rather like a conquered foreign province.”16
     After the acquisition of New Netherland, Charles II and the Duke of
York wished to strengthen English control over the Atlantic seaboard. In
theory, this was to better tax the colonies; in practice, the awarding of the
new proprietary colonies of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and the Carolinas
was a payoff of debts and political favors.
     In 1664, the Duke of York granted the area between the Hudson and
Delaware rivers to two English noblemen. These lands were split into
two distinct colonies, East Jersey and West Jersey. One of West Jersey’s
proprietors included William Penn. The ambitious Penn wanted his own,
larger colony, the lands for which would be granted by both Charles II
and the Duke of York. Pennsylvania consisted of about forty-five thou-
sand square miles west of the Delaware River and the former New Swe-
den. Penn was a member of the Society of Friends, otherwise known as
Quakers, and he intended his colony to be a “colony of Heaven for the
children of Light.”17 Like New England’s aspirations to be a City Upon a
Hill, Pennsylvania was to be an example of godliness. But Penn’s dream
was to create not a colony of unity but rather a colony of harmony.
He noted in 1685 that “the people are a collection of diverse nations
in Europe, as French, Dutch, Germans, Swedes, Danes, Finns, Scotch,
and English; and of the last equal to all the rest.”18 Because Quakers in
Pennsylvania extended to others in America the same rights they had
demanded for themselves in England, the colony attracted a diverse col-
lection of migrants. Slavery was particularly troublesome for some paci-
fist Quakers of Pennsylvania on the grounds that it required violence.
In 1688, members of the Society of Friends in Germantown, outside

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
68                                                                                  ch a pter 3


                     ­ hiladelphia, signed a petition protesting the institution of slavery among
                     P
                     fellow Quakers.
                         The Pennsylvania soil did not lend itself to the slave-based agriculture
                     of the Chesapeake, but other colonies depended heavily on slavery from
                     their very foundations. The creation of the colony of Carolina, later di-
                     vided into North and South Carolina and Georgia, was part of Charles II’s
                     scheme to strengthen the English hold on the Eastern Seaboard and pay
                     off political and cash debts. The Lords Proprietor of Carolina—eight
                     powerful favorites of the king—used the model of the colonization of
                     Barbados to settle the area. In 1670, three ships of colonists from Barba-
                     dos arrived at the mouth of the Ashley River, where they founded Charles
                     Town. This defiance of Spanish claims to the area signified England’s
                     growing confidence as a colonial power.
                         To attract colonists, the Lords Proprietor offered alluring incentives:
                     religious tolerance, political representation by assembly, exemption
                     from fees, and large land grants. These incentives worked, and Carolina
                     grew quickly, attracting not only middling farmers and artisans but also
                     wealthy planters. Colonists who could pay their own way to Carolina
                     were granted 150 acres per family member. The Lords Proprietor allowed
                     for slaves to be counted as members of the family. This encouraged the
                     creation of large rice and indigo plantations along the coast of Carolina;
Henry Popple,
A map of the         these were more stable commodities than deerskins and Indian slaves.
British Empire in    Because of the size of Carolina, the authority of the Lords Proprietor
America with the
French and Span-     was especially weak in the northern reaches on Albemarle Sound. This
ish settlements      region had been settled by Virginians in the 1650s and was increasingly
adjacent thereto,
1733. Library of
                     resistant to Carolina authority. As a result, the Lords Proprietor founded
Congress.            the separate province of North Carolina in 1691.19




               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  69



V. Riot, Rebellion, and Revolt
The seventeenth century saw the establishment and solidification of the
British North American colonies, but this process did not occur peace-
fully. English settlements on the continent were rocked by explosions of
violence, including the Pequot War, the Mystic massacre, King Philip’s
War, the Susquehannock War, Bacon’s Rebellion, and the Pueblo Revolt.
     In May 1637, an armed contingent of English Puritans from Mas-
sachusetts Bay, Plymouth, and Connecticut colonies trekked into Indian
country in territory claimed by New England. Referring to themselves
as the “Sword of the Lord,” this military force intended to attack “that
insolent and barbarous Nation, called the Pequots.” In the resulting vio-
lence, Puritans put the Mystic community to the torch, beginning with the
north and south ends of the town. As Pequot men, women, and children
tried to escape the blaze, other soldiers waited with swords and guns. One
commander estimated that of the “four hundred souls in this Fort . . . not
above five of them escaped out of our hands,” although another counted
near “six or seven hundred” dead. In a span of less than two months, the
English Puritans boasted that the Pequot “were drove out of their coun-
try, and slain by the sword, to the number of fifteen hundred.”20
     The foundations of the war lay within the rivalry between the Pequot,
the Narragansett, and the Mohegan, who battled for control of the fur
and wampum trades in the northeast. This rivalry eventually forced the
English and Dutch to choose sides. The war remained a conflict of Native
interests and initiative, especially as the Mohegan hedged their bets on
the English and reaped the rewards that came with displacing the Pequot.
     Victory over the Pequot not only provided security and stability for
the English colonies but also propelled the Mohegan to new heights of
political and economic influence as the primary power in New England.
Ironically, history seemingly repeated itself later in the century as the
Mohegan, desperate for a remedy to their diminishing strength, joined
the Wampanoag war against the Puritans. This produced a more violent
conflict in 1675 known as King Philip’s War, bringing a decisive end to
Indian power in New England.
     In the winter of 1675, the body of John Sassamon, a Christian,
­Harvard-educated Wampanoag, was found under the ice of a nearby
 pond. A fellow Christian Indian informed English authorities that three
 warriors under the local sachem named Metacom, known to the Eng-
 lish as King Philip, had killed Sassamon, who had previously accused



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
70                                                                         ch a pter 3


            ­ etacom of planning an offensive against the English. The three alleged
            M
            killers appeared before the Plymouth court in June 1675. They were
            found guilty of murder and executed. Several weeks later, a group of
            Wampanoags killed nine English colonists in the town of Swansea.
                Metacom—like most other New England sachems—had entered into
            covenants of “submission” to various colonies, viewing the arrangements
            as relationships of protection and reciprocity rather than subjugation.
            Indians and English lived, traded, worshipped, and arbitrated disputes
            in close proximity before 1675, but the execution of three of Metacom’s
            men at the hands of Plymouth Colony epitomized what many Indians
            viewed as the growing inequality of that relationship. The Wampanoags
            who attacked Swansea may have sought to restore balance, or to retaliate
            for the recent executions. Neither they nor anyone else sought to engulf
            all of New England in war, but that is precisely what happened. Authori-
            ties in Plymouth sprang into action, enlisting help from the neighboring
            colonies of Connecticut and Massachusetts.
                Metacom and his followers eluded colonial forces in the summer of
            1675, striking more Plymouth towns as they moved northwest. Some
            groups joined his forces, while others remained neutral or supported the
            English. The war badly divided some Indian communities. Metacom him-
            self had little control over events as panic and violence spread throughout
            New England in the autumn of 1675. English mistrust of neutral Indians,
            sometimes accompanied by demands that they surrender their weapons,
            pushed many into open war. By the end of 1675, most of the Indians of
            present-day western and central Massachusetts had entered the war, lay-
            ing waste to nearby English towns like Deerfield, Hadley, and Brookfield.
            Hapless colonial forces, spurning the military assistance of Indian allies
            such as the Mohegans, proved unable to locate more mobile Native com-
            munities or intercept Indian attacks.
                The English compounded their problems by attacking the power-
            ful and neutral Narragansett of Rhode Island in December 1675. In an
            action called the Great Swamp Fight, 1,000 Englishmen put the main
            Narragansett village to the torch, gunning down as many as 1,000 Nar-
            ragansett men, women, and children as they fled the maelstrom. The
            surviving Narragansett joined the Indians already fighting the English.
            Between February and April 1676, Native forces devastated a succession
            of English towns closer and closer to Boston.
                In the spring of 1676, the tide turned. The New England colonies
            took the advice of men like Benjamin Church, who urged the greater use



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  71


of Native allies, including Pequot and Mohegan, to find and fight the
mobile warriors. As the Indians were unable to plant crops and forced to
live off the land, their will to continue the struggle waned as companies of
English and Native allies pursued them. Growing numbers of fighters fled
the region, switched sides, or surrendered in the spring and summer. The
English sold many of the latter group into slavery. Colonial forces finally
caught up with Metacom in August 1676, and the sachem was slain by a
Christian Indian fighting with the English.
     The war permanently altered the political and demographic landscape
of New England. Between eight hundred and one thousand English and
at least three thousand Indians perished in the fourteen-month conflict.
Thousands of other Indians fled the region or were sold into slavery. In
1670, Native Americans comprised roughly 25 percent of New England’s
population; a decade later, they made up perhaps 10 percent.21 The war’s
brutality also encouraged a growing hatred of all Indians among many
New England colonists. Though the fighting ceased in 1676, the bitter
legacy of King Philip’s War lived on.
     Sixteen years later, New England faced a new fear: the supernatural.
Beginning in early 1692 and culminating in 1693, Salem Town, Salem
Village, Ipswich, and Andover all tried women and men as witches. Para-
noia swept through the region, and fourteen women and six men were
executed. Five other individuals died in prison. The causes of the tri-
als are numerous and include local rivalries, political turmoil, enduring
trauma of war, faulty legal procedure where accusing others became a
method of self-defense, or perhaps even low-level environmental con-
tamination. Enduring tensions with Indians framed the events, however,
and an Indian or African woman named Tituba enslaved by the local
minister was at the center of the tragedy.22
     Native American communities in Virginia had already been deci-
mated by wars in 1622 and 1644. But a new clash arose in Virginia the
same year that New Englanders crushed Metacom’s forces. This con-
flict, known as Bacon’s Rebellion, grew out of tensions between Native
Americans and English settlers as well as tensions between wealthy En­
glish landowners and the poor settlers who continually pushed west into
Indian territory.
     Bacon’s Rebellion began, appropriately enough, with an argument
over a pig. In the summer of 1675, a group of Doeg Indians visited
Thomas Mathew on his plantation in northern Virginia to collect a debt
that he owed them. When Mathew refused to pay, they took some of his



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
72                                                                         ch a pter 3


            pigs to settle the debt. This “theft” sparked a series of raids and counter-
            raids. The Susquehannock Indians were caught in the crossfire when the
            militia mistook them for Doegs, leaving fourteen dead. A similar pattern
            of escalating violence then repeated: the Susquehannocks retaliated by
            killing colonists in Virginia and Maryland, and the English marshaled
            their forces and laid siege to the Susquehannock. The conflict became
            uglier after the militia executed a delegation of Susquehannock ambas-
            sadors under a flag of truce. A few parties of warriors intent on revenge
            launched raids along the frontier and killed dozens of English colonists.
                 The sudden and unpredictable violence of the Susquehannock War
            triggered a political crisis in Virginia. Panicked colonists fled en masse
            from the vulnerable frontiers, flooding into coastal communities and beg-
            ging the government for help. But the cautious governor, Sir William
            Berkeley, did not send an army after the Susquehannock. He worried
            that a full-scale war would inevitably drag other Indians into the con-
            flict, turning allies into deadly enemies. Berkeley therefore insisted on a
            defensive strategy centered on a string of new fortifications to protect the
            frontier and strict instructions not to antagonize friendly Indians. It was
            a sound military policy but a public relations disaster. Terrified colonists
            condemned Berkeley. Building contracts for the forts went to Berkeley’s
            wealthy friends, who conveniently decided that their own plantations
            were the most strategically vital. Colonists denounced the government as
            a corrupt band of oligarchs more interested in lining their pockets than
            protecting the people.
                 By the spring of 1676, a small group of frontier colonists took matters
            into their own hands. Naming the charismatic young Nathaniel Bacon as
            their leader, these self-styled “volunteers” proclaimed that they took up
            arms in defense of their homes and families. They took pains to assure
            Berkeley that they intended no disloyalty, but Berkeley feared a coup and
            branded the volunteers as traitors. Berkeley finally mobilized an army—
            not to pursue Susquehannock, but to crush the colonists’ rebellion. His
            drastic response catapulted a small band of anti-Indian vigilantes into
            full-fledged rebels whose survival necessitated bringing down the colonial
            government.
                 Bacon and the rebels stalked the Susquehannock as well as friendly
            Indians like the Pamunkeys and the Occaneechi. The rebels became con-
            vinced that there was a massive Indian conspiracy to destroy the Eng-
            lish. Berkeley’s stubborn persistence in defending friendly Indians and
            destroying the Indian-fighting rebels led Bacon to accuse the governor of



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  73


conspiring with a “powerful cabal” of elite planters and with “the pro-
tected and darling Indians” to slaughter his English enemies.23
    In the early summer of 1676, Bacon’s neighbors elected him their
burgess and sent him to Jamestown to confront Berkeley. Though the
House of Burgesses enacted pro-rebel reforms like prohibiting the sale of
arms to Indians and restoring suffrage rights to landless freemen, Bacon’s
supporters remained unsatisfied. Berkeley soon had Bacon arrested and
forced the rebel leader into the humiliating position of publicly begging
forgiveness for his treason. Bacon swallowed this indignity but turned
the tables by gathering an army of followers and surrounding the State
House, demanding that Berkeley name him the general of Virginia and
bless his universal war against Indians. Instead, the seventy-year-old gov-
ernor stepped onto the field in front of the crowd of angry men, unafraid,
and called Bacon a traitor to his face. Then he tore open his shirt and
dared Bacon to shoot him in the heart, if he was so intent on overthrow-
ing his government. “Here!” he shouted before the crowd, “shoot me,
before God, it is a fair mark. Shoot!” When Bacon hesitated, Berkeley
drew his sword and challenged the young man to a duel, knowing that
Bacon could neither back down from a challenge without looking like a
coward nor kill him without making himself into a villain. Instead, Bacon
resorted to bluster and blasphemy. Threatening to slaughter the entire
assembly if necessary, he cursed, “God damn my blood, I came for a
commission, and a commission I will have before I go.”24 Berkeley stood
defiant, but the cowed burgesses finally prevailed upon him to grant Ba-
con’s request. Virginia had its general, and Bacon had his war.
    After this dramatic showdown in Jamestown, Bacon’s Rebellion
quickly spiraled out of control. Berkeley slowly rebuilt his loyalist army,
forcing Bacon to divert his attention to the coasts and away from the In-
dians. But most rebels were more interested in defending their homes and
families than in fighting other Englishmen, and they deserted in droves at
every rumor of Indian activity. In many places, the “rebellion” was less
an organized military campaign than a collection of local grievances and
personal rivalries. Both rebels and loyalists smelled the opportunities for
plunder, seizing their rivals’ estates and confiscating their property.
    For a small but vocal minority of rebels, however, the rebellion be-
came an ideological revolution: Sarah Drummond, wife of rebel leader
William Drummond, advocated independence from England and the for-
mation of a Virginian Republic, declaring “I fear the power of England
no more than a broken straw.” Others struggled for a different kind of



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
74                                                                         ch a pter 3


            independence: white servants and black slaves fought side by side in both
            armies after promises of freedom for military service. Everyone accused
            everyone else of treason, rebels and loyalists switched sides depending on
            which side was winning, and the whole Chesapeake disintegrated into
            a confused melee of secret plots and grandiose crusades, sordid vendet-
            tas and desperate gambits, with Indians and English alike struggling for
            supremacy and survival. One Virginian summed up the rebellion as “our
            time of anarchy.”25
                The rebels steadily lost ground and ultimately suffered a crushing de-
            feat. Bacon died of typhus in the autumn of 1676, and his successors
            surrendered to Berkeley in January 1677. Berkeley summarily tried and
            executed the rebel leadership in a succession of kangaroo courts-martial.
            Before long, however, the royal fleet arrived, bearing over one thousand
            red-coated troops and a royal commission of investigation charged with
            restoring order to the colony. The commissioners replaced the governor
            and dispatched Berkeley to London, where he died in disgrace.
                But the conclusion of Bacon’s Rebellion was uncertain, and the main-
            tenance of order remained precarious for years afterward. The garrison
            of royal troops discouraged both incursion by hostile Indians and insur-
            rection by discontented colonists, allowing the king to continue profiting
            from tobacco revenues. The end of armed resistance did not mean a reso-
            lution to the underlying tensions destabilizing colonial society. Indians
            inside Virginia remained an embattled minority, and Indians outside Vir-
            ginia remained a terrifying threat. Elite planters continued to grow rich
            by exploiting their indentured servants and marginalizing small farmers.
            Most Virginians continued to resent their exploitation with a simmering
            fury. Virginia legislators did recognize the extent of popular hostility to-
            ward colonial rule, however, and improved the social and political condi-
            tions of poor white Virginians in the years after the rebellion. During the
            same period, the increasing availability of enslaved workers through the
            Atlantic slave trade contributed to planters’ large-scale adoption of slave
            labor in the Chesapeake.
                Just a few years after Bacon’s Rebellion, the Spanish experienced their
            own tumult in the area of contemporary New Mexico. The Spanish had
            been maintaining control partly by suppressing Native American beliefs.
            Friars aggressively enforced Catholic practice, burning native idols and
            masks and other sacred objects and banishing traditional spiritual prac-
            tices. In 1680, the Puebloan religious leader Popé, who had been arrested
            and whipped for “sorcery” five years earlier, led various Puebloan groups



      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  75




in rebellion. Several thousand Puebloan warriors razed the Spanish             Built sometime
                                                                               between 1000 and
countryside and besieged Santa Fe. They killed four hundred, including         1450 CE, the Taos
twenty-one Franciscan priests, and allowed two thousand other Span-            Pueblo located
iards and Christian Puebloans to flee. It was perhaps the greatest act of      near modern-day
                                                                               Taos, New Mex-
Indian resistance in North American history.                                   ico, functioned
    In New Mexico, the Puebloans eradicated all traces of Spanish rule.        as a base for the
                                                                               leader Popé dur-
They destroyed churches and threw themselves into rivers to wash away          ing the Pueblo
their Christian baptisms. “The God of the Christians is dead,” Popé pro-       Revolt. Luca
                                                                               Galuzzi (pho-
claimed, and the Puebloans resumed traditional spiritual practices.26 The      tographer), Taos
Spanish were exiled for twelve years. They returned in 1692, weakened,         Pueblo, 2007.
to reconquer New Mexico.                                                       Wikimedia. Cre-
                                                                               ative Commons
    The late seventeenth century was a time of great violence and turmoil.     Attribution-Share
Bacon’s Rebellion turned white Virginians against one another, King            Alike 2.5 Generic.

Philip’s War shattered Indian resistance in New England, and the Pueblo
Revolt struck a major blow to Spanish power. It would take several more
decades before similar patterns erupted in Carolina and Pennsylvania,
but the constant advance of European settlements provoked conflict in
these areas as well.
    In 1715, the Yamasee, Carolina’s closest allies and most lucrative trad-
ing partners, turned against the colony and nearly destroyed it ­entirely.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
76                                                                         ch a pter 3


            Writing from Carolina to London, the settler George Rodd believed the
            Yamasee wanted nothing less than “the whole continent and to kill us or
            chase us all out.”27 The Yamasee would eventually advance within miles
            of Charles Town.
                The Yamasee War’s first victims were traders. The governor had dis-
            patched two of the colony’s most prominent men to visit and pacify a
            Yamasee council following rumors of native unrest. The Yamasee quickly
            proved the fears well founded by killing the emissaries and every English
            trader they could corral.
                The Yamasee, like many other Indians, had come to depend on Eng-
            lish courts as much as the flintlock rifles and ammunition that traders
            offered them for slaves and animal skins. Feuds between English agents
            in Indian country had crippled the court of trade and shut down all di-
            plomacy, provoking the violent Yamasee reprisal. Most Indian villages in
            the southeast sent at least a few warriors to join what quickly became a
            pan-Indian cause against the colony.
                Yet Charles Town ultimately survived the onslaught by preserving
            one crucial alliance with the Cherokee. By 1717, the conflict had largely
            dried up, and the only remaining menace was roaming Yamasee bands
            operating from Spanish Florida. Most Indian villages returned to terms
            with Carolina and resumed trading. The lucrative trade in Indian slaves,
            however, which had consumed fifty thousand souls in five decades, largely
            dwindled after the war. The danger was too high for traders, and the
            colonies discovered even greater profits by importing Africans to work
            new rice plantations. Herein lies the birth of the Old South, that expanse
            of plantations that created untold wealth and misery. Indians retained
            the strongest militaries in the region, but they never again threatened the
            survival of English colonies.
                If a colony existed where peace with Indians might continue, it would
            be Pennsylvania. At the colony’s founding, William Penn created a
            Quaker religious imperative for the peaceful treatment of Indians. While
            Penn never doubted that the English would appropriate Native lands,
            he demanded that his colonists obtain Indian territories through pur-
            chase rather than violence. Though Pennsylvanians maintained relatively
            peaceful relations with Native Americans, increased immigration and
            booming land speculation increased the demand for land. Coercive and
            fraudulent methods of negotiation became increasingly prominent. The
            Walking Purchase of 1737 was emblematic of both colonists’ desire for
            cheap land and the changing relationship between Pennsylvanians and
            their Native neighbors.

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  77


    Through treaty negotiation in 1737, Native Delaware leaders agreed
to sell Pennsylvania all of the land that a man could walk in a day and a
half, a common measurement used by Delawares in evaluating distances.
John and Thomas Penn, joined by the land speculator and longtime friend
of the Penns James Logan, hired a team of skilled runners to complete the
“walk” on a prepared trail. The runners traveled from Wrightstown to
the present-day town of Jim Thorpe, and proprietary officials then drew
the new boundary line perpendicular to the runners’ route, extending
northeast to the Delaware River. The colonial government thus measured
out a tract much larger than the Delaware had originally intended to
sell, roughly 1,200 square miles. As a result, Delaware-proprietary rela-
tions suffered. Many Delaware left the lands in question and migrated
westward to join Shawnee and other Delaware already living in the Ohio
Valley. There they established diplomatic and trade relationships with the
French. Memories of the suspect purchase endured into the 1750s and
became a chief point of contention between the Pennsylvanian govern-
ment and the Delaware during the upcoming Seven Years’ War.28


VI. Conclusion
The seventeenth century saw the creation and maturation of Britain’s
North American colonies. Colonists endured a century of struggle against
unforgiving climates, hostile natives, and imperial intrigue. They did so
largely through ruthless expressions of power. Colonists conquered Na-
tive Americans, attacked European rivals, and joined a highly lucrative
transatlantic economy rooted in slavery. After surviving a century of des-
peration and war, British North American colonists fashioned increas-
ingly complex societies with unique religious cultures, economic ties, and
political traditions. These societies would come to shape not only North
America but soon the entirety of the Atlantic World.


VII. Reference Material
This chapter was edited by Daniel Johnson, with content contributions by Greg-
ory Ablavsky, James Ambuske, Carolyn Arena, L. D. Burnett, Lori Daggar, Dan-
iel Johnson, Hendrick Isom, D. Andrew Johnson, Matthew Kruer, Joseph Locke,
Samantha Miller, Melissa Morris, Bryan Rindfleisch, Emily Romeo, John Saillant,
Ian Saxine, Marie Stango, Luke Willert, and Ben Wright.
     Recommended citation: Gregory Ablavsky et al., “British North America,”
Daniel Johnson, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
78                                                                                   ch a pter 3



            Notes to Ch a p ter 3
                 1. Edgar Legare Pennington, “The Reverend Francis Le Jau’s Work Among
            Indians and Negro Slaves,” Journal of Southern History, 1, no. 4 (November
            1935): 442–458.
                 2. William Waller Hening, Statutes at Large; Being a Collection of all the
            Laws of Virginia, Vol. 2 (Richmond, VA: Samuel Pleasants, 1809–1823), 170,
            260, 266, 270.
                 3. Captain Thomas Phillips, “A Journal of a Voyage Made in the Hannibal of
            London, 16,” in Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Documents Illustrative of the Slave Trade
            to America: Volume 1, 1441–1700 (New York: Octagon Books, 1969), 403.
                 4. Alan Gallay, The Indian Slave Trade: The Rise of the English Empire in the
            American South 1670–1717 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2002), 299.
                 5. Alexander Falconbridge, An Account of the Slave Trade on the Coast of
            Africa (London: J. Phillips, 1788).
                 6. Phillip Curtin estimated that 9 million Africans were carried across the
            Atlantic. Joseph E. Inikori’s figure estimated 15 million, and Patrick Manning es-
            timated 12 million transported with 10.5 million surviving the voyage. See Phillip
            D. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census (Madison: University of Wisconsin
            Press, 1969); Joseph E. Inikori, “Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: An Assess-
            ment of Curtin and Anstey,” Journal of Africa 17 (1976): 197–223; and Patrick
            Manning, “Historical Datasets on Africa and the African Atlantic,” Journal of
            Comparative Economics 40, no. 4 (2012): 604–607.
                 7. Paul E. Lovejoy, Transformations in Slavery: A History of Slavery in Af-
            rica (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 36.
                 8. Jane Landers, “Slavery in the Lower South,” OAH Magazine of History
            17, no. 3 (2003): 23–27.
                 9. Lynn Dumenil, ed., The Oxford Encyclopedia of American Social History
            (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 512.
                 10. “Facts about the Slave Trade and Slavery,” Gilder Lehrman Institute of
            American History. https://​www​.gilderlehrman​.org/​history​-by​-era/​slavery​-and​-anti​
            -slavery/​resources/​facts​-about​-slave​-trade​-and​-slavery, accessed April 23, 2018.
                 11. Willie Lee Nichols Rose, ed., A Documentary History of Slavery in
            North America (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1999), 19.
                 12. Stephanie M. H. Camp, Closer to Freedom: Enslaved Women and Every-
            day Resistance in the Plantation South (Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
            lina Press, 2004), 63–64.
                 13. John H. Elliott, Empires of the Atlantic World: Britain and Spain in
            America, 1492–1830 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006), 148–49.
                 14. Paul Kléber Monod, Imperial Island: A History of Britain and Its Em-
            pire, 1660–1837 (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), 80.
                 15. Owen Stanwood, “Rumours and Rebellions in the English Atlantic
            World, 1688–9,” in The Final Crisis of the Stuart Monarchy: The Revolutions of
            1688–91 in Their British, Atlantic and European Contexts, eds. Tim Harris and
            Steven Taylor (Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press, 2013), 214.
                 16. Joyce D. Goodfriend, Before the Melting Pot: Society and Culture in Colo-
            nial New York City, 1664–1730 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992), 54.

      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
B r i ti s h N o r t h A m e r ic a  79


     17. Quoted in David Hackett Fischer, Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways
in America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), 459.
     18. Albert Cook Myers, ed., Narratives of Early Pennsylvania, West New
Jersey, and Delaware, 1630–1707 (New York: Scribner, 1912), 260.
     19. Noeleen McIlvenna, A Very Mutinous People: The Struggle for North
Carolina, 1660–1713 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009).
     20. John Mason, A Brief History of the Pequot War (1736), (Boston:
S. Kneeland and T. Green, 1736). http://​digitalcommons​.unl​.edu/​cgi/​viewcontent​
.cgi​?article​=​1042​&​context​=​etas.
     21. James David Drake, King Philip’s War: Civil War in New England,
1675–1676 (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1999), 169.
     22. Paul Boyer and Stephen Nissenbaum, Salem Possessed: The Social Ori-
gins of Witchcraft (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993). For more
on Tituba, see Elaine G. Breslaw, Tituba, Reluctant Witch of Salem: Devilish
Indians and Puritan Fantasies (New York: New York University Press, 1996).
     23. Nathaniel Bacon, “Manifesto (1676),” in The English Literatures of
America: 1500–1800, ed. Myra Jehlen and Michael Warner (New York: Rout-
ledge, 1996), 226.
     24. Mary Newton Stanard, The Story of Bacon’s Rebellion (New York:
Neale, 1907), 77–78.
     25. Quoted in April Lee Hatfield, Atlantic Virginia: Intercolonial Relations
in the Seventeenth Century (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
2004), 286 n. 27.
     26. Robert Silverberg, The Pueblo Revolt (Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1994), 131.
     27. Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series, America and West Indies, Au-
gust 1714–December 1715 (London: Kraus Reprint, 1928), 168–169.
     28. Steven Craig Harper, Promised Land: Penn’s Holy Experiment, The
Walking Purchase, and the Dispossession of Delawares, 1600–1763 (Bethlehem,
PA: Lehigh University Press, 2006).

R e c om m e n d e d R e a din g
Blackburn, Robin. The Making of New World Slavery: From the Baroque to the
     Modern, 1492–1800. London: Verso, 1997.
Braddick, Michael. God’s Fury, England’s Fire: A New History of the English
    Civil Wars. New York: Penguin, 2008.
Brown, Kathleen M. Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, Anxious Patriarchs: Gender,
    Race, and Power in Colonial Virginia. Williamsburg, VA: University of North
    Carolina Press, 1996.
Chaplin, Joyce. Subject Matter: Technology, the Body, and Science on the Anglo-
    American Frontier, 1500–1676. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
    2001.
Donoghue, John. Fire Under the Ashes: An Atlantic History of the English Revo-
    lution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013.
Gallay, Alan. The Indian Slave Trade: The Rise of the English Empire in the
    ­American South, 1670–1717. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
80                                                                          ch a pter 3


            Goodfriend, Joyce D. Before the Melting Pot: Society and Culture in Colonial
                New York City, 1664–1730. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
            Heywood, Linda M., and John K. Thornton. Central Africans, Atlantic Creoles,
                and the Foundation of the Americas, 1585–1660. New York: Cambridge
                University Press, 2007.
            Landsman, Ned C. Crossroads of Empire: The Middle Colonies in British North
                America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010.
            Lepore, Jill. The Name of War: King Philip’s War and the Origins of American
                Identity. New York: Knopf Doubleday, 2009.
            Little, Ann M. Many Captives of Esther Wheelright. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
                versity Press, 2016.
            Merrell, James H. Into the American Woods: Negotiations on the Pennsylvania
                Frontier. New York: Norton, 2000.
            Mustakeem, Sowande’ M. Slavery at Sea: Terror, Sex, and Sickness in the Middle
                Passage. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2016.
            O’Malley, Gregory E. Final Passages: The Intercolonial Slave Trade of British
                America, 1619–1807. Williamsburg, VA: University of North Carolina Press,
                2014.
            Parent, Anthony S. Foul Means: The Formation of a Slave Society in Virginia,
                1660–1740. Williamsburg, VA: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.
            Parrish, Susan Scott. American Curiosity: Cultures of Natural History in the
                Colonial British Atlantic World. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
                Press, 2006.
            Pestana, Carla Gardina. The English Atlantic in an Age of Revolution, 1640–
                1661. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
            Pulsipher, Jenny Hale. Subjects unto the Same King: Indians, English, and the
                Contest for Authority in Colonial New England. Philadelphia: University of
                Pennsylvania Press, 2005.
            Ramsey, William L. The Yamasee War: A Study of Culture, Economy, and Con-
                flict in the Colonial South. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2008.
            Rice, James D. Tales from a Revolution: Bacon’s Rebellion and the Transforma-
                tion of Early America. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
            Roney, Jessica Choppin. Governed by a Spirit of Opposition: The Origins of
                American Political Practice in Colonial Philadelphia. Baltimore: Johns Hop-
                kins University Press, 2014.
            Smallwood, Stephanie E. Saltwater Slavery: A Middle Passage from Africa to
                American Diaspora. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008.
            Stanwood, Owen. The Empire Reformed: English America in the Age of the Glo-
                rious Revolution. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011.
            Taylor, Alan. American Colonies: The Settling of North America. New York: Pen-
                guin, 2002.
            Wood, Peter H. Black Majority: Negroes in Colonial South Carolina from 1670
                through the Stono Rebellion. New York: Norton, 1975.




      © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
               Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4
Colonial Society

I. Introduction
Eighteenth-century American culture moved in competing directions.             Charles Willson
                                                                               Peale, The Peale
Commercial, military, and cultural ties between Great Britain and the
                                                                               Family, c. 1771–
North American colonies tightened while a new distinctly American cul-         1773. Collection
ture began to form and bind together colonists from New Hampshire to           of the New-York
                                                                               Historical Society,
Georgia. Immigrants from other European nations meanwhile combined             object #1867.298.
with Native Americans and enslaved Africans to create an increasingly di-
verse colonial population. All—men and women, European, Native Amer-
ican, and African—led distinct lives and wrought new distinct societies.
While life in the thirteen colonies was shaped in part by English practices
and participation in the larger Atlantic World, emerging cultural patterns
increasingly transformed North America into something wholly different.


II. Consumption and Trade in the British Atlantic
Transatlantic trade greatly enriched Britain, but it also created high
standards of living for many North American colonists. This two-way

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
8 2 cha pter 4


                    relationship reinforced the colonial feeling of commonality with British
                    culture. It was not until trade relations, disturbed by political changes
                    and the demands of warfare, became strained in the 1760s that colonists
                    began to question these ties.
                        During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, improvements in
                    manufacturing, transportation, and the availability of credit increased
                    the opportunity for colonists to purchase consumer goods. Instead of
                    making their own tools, clothes, and utensils, colonists increasingly pur-
                    chased luxury items made by specialized artisans and manufacturers. As
                    the incomes of Americans rose and the prices of these commodities fell,
                    these items shifted from luxuries to common goods. The average person’s
Joseph Highmore,    ability to spend money on consumer goods became a sign of their respect-
The Harlowe
Family, from        ability. Historians have called this process the “consumer revolution.”1
Samuel Richard-         Britain relied on the colonies as a source of raw materials, such as
son’s “Clarissa,”
1745–1747.
                    lumber and tobacco. Americans engaged with new forms of trade and
Wikimedia.          financing that increased their ability to buy British-made goods. But the




              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  83


ways in which colonists paid for these goods varied sharply from those in
Britain. When settlers first arrived in North America, they typically car-
ried very little hard or metallic British money with them. Discovering no
precious metals (and lacking the Crown’s authority to mint coins), colo-
nists relied on barter and nontraditional forms of exchange, including
everything from nails to the wampum used by Native American groups in
the Northeast. To deal with the lack of currency, many colonies resorted
to “commodity money,” which varied from place to place. In Virginia,
for example, the colonial legislature stipulated a rate of exchange for
tobacco, standardizing it as a form of money in the colony. Commodi-
ties could be cumbersome and difficult to transport, so a system of notes
developed. These notes allowed individuals to deposit a certain amount
of tobacco in a warehouse and receive a note bearing the value of the
deposit that could be traded as money. In 1690, colonial Massachusetts
became the first place in the Western world to issue paper bills to be used
as money.2 These notes, called bills of credit, were issued for finite peri-
ods of time on the colony’s credit and varied in denomination.
    While these notes provided colonists with a much-needed medium
for exchange, it was not without its problems. Currency that worked in
Virginia might be worthless in Pennsylvania. Colonists and officials in
Britain debated whether it was right or desirable to use mere paper, as
opposed to gold or silver, as a medium of exchange. Paper money tended
to lose value quicker than coins and was often counterfeited. These prob-
lems, as well as British merchants’ reluctance to accept depreciated paper
notes, caused the Board of Trade to restrict the uses of paper money in the
Currency Acts of 1751 and 1763. Paper money was not the only medium
of exchange, however. Colonists also used metal coins. Barter and the
extension of credit—which could take the form of bills of exchange, akin
to modern-day personal checks—remained important forces throughout
the colonial period. Still, trade between colonies was greatly hampered
by the lack of standardized money.
    Businesses on both sides of the Atlantic advertised both their goods
and promises of obtaining credit. The consistent availability of credit al-
lowed families of modest means to buy consumer items previously avail-
able only to elites. Cheap consumption allowed middle-class Americans
to match many of the trends in clothing, food, and household décor that
traditionally marked the wealthiest, aristocratic classes. Provincial Amer-
icans, often seen by their London peers as less cultivated or “backwater,”
could present themselves as lords and ladies of their own communities



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
8 4 cha pter 4


        by purchasing and displaying British-made goods. Visiting the home of
        a successful businessman in Boston, John Adams described “the Furni-
        ture, which alone cost a thousand Pounds sterling. A seat it is for a noble
        Man, a Prince. The Turkey Carpets, the painted Hangings, the Marble
        Table, the rich Beds with crimson Damask Curtains and Counterpins, the
        beautiful Chimney Clock, the Spacious Garden, are the most magnificent
        of any thing I have seen.”3 But many Americans worried about the con-
        sequences of rising consumerism. A writer for the Boston Evening Post
        remarked on this new practice of purchasing status: “For ’tis well known
        how Credit is a mighty inducement with many People to purchase this
        and the other Thing which they may well enough do without.”4 Ameri-
        cans became more likely to find themselves in debt, whether to their local
        shopkeeper or a prominent London merchant, creating new feelings of
        dependence.
            Of course, the thirteen continental colonies were not the only Brit-
        ish colonies in the Western Hemisphere. In fact, they were consider-
        ably less important to the Crown than the sugar-producing islands of
        the Caribbean, including Jamaica, Barbados, the Leeward Islands, Gre-
        nada, St. Vincent, and Dominica. These British colonies were also in-
        extricably connected to the continental colonies. Caribbean plantations
        dedicated nearly all of their land to the wildly profitable crop of sugar-
        cane, so North American colonies sold surplus food and raw materials
        to these wealthy island colonies. Lumber was in high demand, especially
        in Barbados, where planters nearly deforested the island to make room
        for sugar plantations. To compensate for a lack of lumber, Barbadian
        colonists ordered house frames from New England. These prefabricated
        frames were sent via ships from which planters transported them to their
        plantations. Caribbean colonists also relied on the continental colonies
        for livestock, purchasing cattle and horses. The most lucrative exchange
        was the slave trade.
            Connections between the Caribbean and North America benefited
        both sides. Those living on the continent relied on the Caribbean colo-
        nists to satisfy their craving for sugar and other goods like mahogany.
        British colonists in the Caribbean began cultivating sugar in the 1640s,
        and sugar took the Atlantic World by storm. In fact, by 1680, sugar
        exports from the tiny island of Barbados valued more than the total ex-
        ports of all the continental colonies.5 Jamaica, acquired by the Crown
        in 1655, surpassed Barbados in sugar production toward the end of the
        seventeenth century. North American colonists, like Britons around



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  85




the world, craved sugar to sweeten their tea and food. Colonial elites         John Hinton, A
                                                                               representation of
also sought to decorate their parlors and dining rooms with the silky,         the sugar-cane and
polished surfaces of rare mahogany as opposed to local wood. While             the art of making
the bulk of this in-demand material went to Britain and Europe, New            sugar, 1749. Li-
                                                                               brary of Congress.
England merchants imported the wood from the Caribbean, where it
was then transformed into exquisite furniture for those who could af-
ford it.
    These systems of trade all existed with the purpose of enriching Great
Britain. To ensure that profits ended up in Britain, Parliament issued taxes
on trade under the Navigation Acts. These taxes intertwined consump-
tion with politics. Prior to 1763, Britain found that enforcing the regula-
tory laws they passed was difficult and often cost them more than the
duty revenue they would bring in. As a result, colonists found it relatively
easy to violate the law and trade with foreign nations, pirates, or smug-
glers. Customs officials were easily bribed and it was not uncommon
to see Dutch, French, or West Indies ships laden with prohibited goods
in American ports. When smugglers were caught, their American peers



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
8 6 cha pter 4


        often acquitted them. British officials estimated that nearly £700,000
        worth of illicit goods was brought into the American colonies annually.6
        Pirates also helped to perpetuate the illegal trading activities by providing
        a buffer between merchants and foreign ships.
            Beginning with the Sugar Act in 1764, and continuing with the Stamp
        Act and the Townshend Acts, Parliament levied taxes on sugar, paper,
        lead, glass, and tea, all products that contributed to colonists’ sense of
        gentility. In response, patriots organized nonimportation agreements and
        reverted to domestic products. Homespun cloth became a political state-
        ment. A writer in the Essex Gazette in 1769 proclaimed, “I presume
        there never was a Time when, or a Place where, the Spinning Wheel could
        more influence the Affairs of Men, than at present.”7
            The consumer revolution fueled the growth of colonial cities. Cities in
        colonial America were crossroads for the movement of people and goods.
        One in twenty colonists lived in cities by 1775.8 Some cities grew organi-
        cally over time, while others were planned from the start. New York’s
        and Boston’s seventeenth-century street plans reflected the haphazard ar-
        rangement of medieval cities in Europe. In other cities like Philadelphia
        and Charleston, civic leaders laid out urban plans according to calcu-
        lated systems of regular blocks and squares. Planners in Annapolis and
        Williamsburg also imposed regularity and order over their city streets
        through the placement of government, civic, and educational buildings.
            By 1775, Boston, Newport, New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston
        were the five largest cities in British North America. Philadelphia, New
        York, Boston, and Charleston had populations of approximately 40,000,
        25,000, 16,000, and 12,000 people, respectively.9 Urban society was
        highly stratified. At the base of the social ladder were the laboring classes,
        which included both enslaved and free people ranging from apprentices
        to master craftsmen. Next came the middling sort: shopkeepers, artisans,
        and skilled mariners. Above them stood the merchant elites, who tended
        to be actively involved in the city’s social and political affairs, as well as in
        the buying, selling, and trading of goods. Enslaved men and women had
        a visible presence in both northern and southern cities.
            The bulk of the enslaved population lived in rural areas and per-
        formed agricultural labor. In port cities, slaves often worked as domestic
        servants and in skilled trades: distilleries, shipyards, lumberyards, and
        ropewalks. Between 1725 and 1775, slavery became increasingly signifi-
        cant in the northern colonies as urban residents sought greater participa-
        tion in the maritime economy. Massachusetts was the first slave-holding



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  87


colony in New England. New York traced its connections to slavery and
the slave trade back to the Dutch settlers of New Netherland in the sev-
enteenth century. Philadelphia also became an active site of the Atlantic
slave trade, and slaves accounted for nearly 8 percent of the city’s popu-
lation in 1770.10 In southern cities, including Charleston, urban slavery
played an important role in the market economy. Slaves, both rural and
urban, made up the majority of the laboring population on the eve of the
American Revolution.


III. Slavery, Antislavery, and Atlantic Exchange
Slavery was a transatlantic institution, but it developed distinct charac-
teristics in British North America. By 1750, slavery was legal in every
North American colony, but local economic imperatives, demographic
trends, and cultural practices all contributed to distinct colonial variants
of slavery.
    Virginia, the oldest of the English mainland colonies, imported its first
slaves in 1619. Virginia planters built larger and larger estates and guar-
anteed that these estates would remain intact through the use of primo-
geniture (in which a family’s estate would descend to the eldest male heir)
and the entail (a legal procedure that prevented the breakup and sale
of estates). This distribution of property, which kept wealth and prop-
erty consolidated, guaranteed that the great planters would dominate
social and economic life in the Chesapeake. This system also fostered
an economy dominated by tobacco. By 1750, there were approximately
one hundred thousand African slaves in Virginia, at least 40 percent of
the colony’s total population.11 Most of these slaves worked on large
estates under the gang system of labor, working from dawn to dusk in
groups with close supervision by a white overseer or enslaved “driver”
who could use physical force to compel labor.
    Virginians used the law to protect the interests of slaveholders. In 1705
the House of Burgesses passed its first comprehensive slave code. Earlier
laws had already guaranteed that the children of enslaved women would
be born slaves, conversion to Christianity would not lead to freedom, and
owners could not free their slaves unless they transported them out of the
colony. Slave owners could not be convicted of murder for killing a slave;
conversely, any black Virginian who struck a white colonist would be
severely whipped. Virginia planters used the law to maximize the profit-
ability of their slaves and closely regulate every aspect of their daily lives.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
8 8 cha pter 4


             In South Carolina and Georgia, slavery was also central to colonial
        life, but specific local conditions created a very different system. Geor-
        gia was founded by the philanthropist James Oglethorpe, who originally
        banned slavery from the colony. But by 1750, slavery was legal through-
        out the region. South Carolina had been a slave colony from its founding
        and, by 1750, was the only mainland colony with a majority enslaved
        African population. The Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina, coau-
        thored by the philosopher John Locke in 1669, explicitly legalized slavery
        from the very beginning. Many early settlers in Carolina were slavehold-
        ers from British Caribbean sugar islands, and they brought their brutal
        slave codes with them. Defiant slaves could legally be beaten, branded,
        mutilated, even castrated. In 1740 a new law stated that killing a rebel-
        lious slave was not a crime and even the murder of a slave was treated as
        a minor misdemeanor. South Carolina also banned the freeing of slaves
        unless the freed slave left the colony.12
             Despite this brutal regime, a number of factors combined to give
        South Carolina slaves more independence in their daily lives. Rice, the
        staple crop underpinning the early Carolina economy, was widely culti-
        vated in West Africa, and planters commonly requested that merchants
        sell them slaves skilled in the complex process of rice cultivation. Slaves
        from Senegambia were particularly prized.13 The expertise of these slaves
        contributed to one of the most lucrative economies in the colonies. The
        swampy conditions of rice plantations, however, fostered dangerous
        diseases. Malaria and other tropical diseases spread and caused many
        owners to live away from their plantations. These elites, who commonly
        owned a number of plantations, typically lived in Charleston town houses
        to avoid the diseases of the rice fields. West Africans, however, were far
        more likely to have a level of immunity to malaria (due to a genetic trait
        that also contributes to higher levels of sickle cell anemia), reinforcing
        planters’ racial belief that Africans were particularly suited to labor in
        tropical environments.
             With plantation owners often far from home, Carolina slaves had less
        direct oversight than those in the Chesapeake. Furthermore, many Caro-
        lina rice plantations used the task system to organize slave labor. Under
        this system, slaves were given a number of specific tasks to complete in a
        day. Once those tasks were complete, slaves often had time to grow their
        own crops on garden plots allotted by plantation owners. Thriving un-
        derground markets allowed slaves here a degree of economic autonomy.
        Carolina slaves also had an unparalleled degree of cultural autonomy.



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  89


This autonomy coupled with the frequent arrival of new Africans en-
abled a slave culture that retained many African practices.14 Syncretic
languages like Gullah and Geechee contained many borrowed African
terms, and traditional African basket weaving (often combined with Na-
tive American techniques) survives in the region to this day.
    This unique Lowcountry slave culture contributed to the Stono Rebel-
lion in September 1739. On a Sunday morning while planters attended
church, a group of about eighty slaves set out for Spanish Florida under
a banner that read “Liberty!,” burning plantations and killing at least
twenty white settlers as they marched. They were headed for Fort Mose,
a free black settlement on the Georgia-Florida border, emboldened by the
Spanish Empire’s offer of freedom to any English slaves. The local militia
defeated the rebels in battle, captured and executed many of the slaves,
and sold others to the sugar plantations of the West Indies. Though the
rebellion was ultimately unsuccessful, it was a violent reminder that
slaves would fight for freedom.
    Slavery was also an important institution in the mid-Atlantic colo-
nies. While New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania never developed
plantation economies, slaves were often employed on larger farms grow-
ing cereal grains. Enslaved Africans worked alongside European tenant
farmers on New York’s Hudson Valley “patroonships,” huge tracts of
land granted to a few early Dutch families. As previously mentioned,
slaves were also a common sight in Philadelphia, New York City, and
other ports where they worked in the maritime trades and domestic
service. New York City’s economy was so reliant on slavery that over
40 percent of its population was enslaved by 1700, while 15 to 20 per-
cent of Pennsyl­vania’s colonial population was enslaved by 1750.15 In
New York, the high density of slaves and a particularly diverse European
population increased the threat of rebellion. A 1712 slave rebellion in
New York City resulted in the deaths of nine white colonists. In retribu-
tion, twenty-one slaves were executed and six others committed suicide
before they could be burned alive. In 1741, authorities uncovered another
planned rebellion by African slaves, free blacks, and poor whites. Panic
unleashed a witch hunt that only stopped after thirty-two slaves and free
blacks and five poor whites were executed. Another seventy slaves were
deported, likely to the sugarcane fields of the West Indies.16
    Increasingly uneasy about the growth of slavery in the region, Quak-
ers were the first group to turn against slavery. Quaker beliefs in radi-
cal nonviolence and the fundamental equality of all human souls made



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
9 0 cha pter 4


        s­ lavery hard to justify. Most commentators argued that slavery originated
         in war, where captives were enslaved rather than executed. To pacifist
         Quakers, then, the very foundation of slavery was illegitimate. Further-
         more, Quaker belief in the equality of souls challenged the racial basis
         of slavery. By 1758, Quakers in Pennsylvania disowned members who
         engaged in the slave trade, and by 1772 slave-owning Quakers could be
         expelled from their meetings. These local activities in Pennsylvania had
         broad implications as the decision to ban slavery and slave trading was
         debated in Quaker meetings throughout the English-speaking world. The
         free black population in Philadelphia and other northern cities also con-
         tinually agitated against slavery.
              Slavery as a system of labor never took off in Massachusetts, Con-
         necticut, or New Hampshire, though it was legal throughout the region.
         The absence of cash crops like tobacco or rice minimized the economic
         use of slavery. In Massachusetts, only about 2 percent of the population
         was enslaved as late as the 1760s. The few slaves in the colony were con-
         centrated in Boston along with a sizable free black community that made
         up about 10 percent of the city’s population.17 While slavery itself never
         really took root in New England, the slave trade was a central element of
         the region’s economy. Every major port in the region participated to some
         extent in the transatlantic trade—Newport, Rhode Island, alone had at
         least 150 ships active in the trade by 1740—and New England also pro-
         vided foodstuffs and manufactured goods to West Indian plantations.18


        IV. Pursuing Political, Religious, and Individual Freedom
        Consumption, trade, and slavery drew the colonies closer to Great Brit-
        ain, but politics and government split them further apart. Democracy in
        Europe more closely resembled oligarchies rather than republics, with
        only elite members of society eligible to serve in elected positions. Most
        European states did not hold regular elections, with Britain and the
        Dutch Republic being the two major exceptions. However, even in these
        countries, only a tiny portion of males could vote. In the North Ameri-
        can colonies, by contrast, white male suffrage was far more widespread.
        In addition to having greater popular involvement, colonial government
        also had more power in a variety of areas. Assemblies and legislatures
        regulated businesses, imposed new taxes, cared for the poor in their com-
        munities, built roads and bridges, and made most decisions concerning
        education. Colonial Americans sued often, which in turn led to more



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  91


power for local judges and more prestige in jury service. Thus, lawyers
became extremely important in American society and in turn played a
greater role in American politics.
    American society was less tightly controlled than European society.
This led to the rise of various interest groups, each at odds with the
other. These various interest groups arose based on commonalities in
various areas. Some commonalities arose over class-based distinctions,
while others were due to ethnic or religious ties. One of the major dif-
ferences between modern politics and colonial political culture was the
lack of distinct, stable political parties. The most common disagreement
in colonial politics was between the elected assemblies and the royal gov-
ernor. Generally, the various colonial legislatures were divided into fac-
tions who either supported or opposed the current governor’s political
ideology.
    Political structures in the colonies fell under one of three main cat-
egories: provincial (New Hampshire, New York, Virginia, North Caro-
lina, South Carolina, and Georgia), proprietary (Pennsylvania, Delaware,
New Jersey, and Maryland), and charter (Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
and Connecticut). Provincial colonies were the most tightly controlled
by the Crown. The British king appointed all provincial governors and
these Crown governors could veto any decision made by their colony’s
legislative assemblies. Proprietary colonies had a similar structure, with
one important difference: governors were appointed by a lord proprietor,
an individual who had purchased or received the rights to the colony
from the Crown. Proprietary colonies therefore often had more freedoms
and liberties than other North American colonies. Charter colonies had
the most complex system of government: they were formed by political
corporations or interest groups that drew up a charter clearly delineat-
ing powers between the executive, legislative, and judiciary branches of
government. Rather than having appointed governors, charter colonies
elected their own from among property-owning men in the colony.
    After the governor, colonial government was broken down into two
main divisions: the council and the assembly. The council was essentially
the governor’s cabinet, often composed of prominent individuals within
the colony, such as the head of the militia or the attorney general. The
governor appointed these men, although the appointments were often
subject to approval from Parliament. The assembly was composed of
elected, property-owning men whose official goal was to ensure that co-
lonial law conformed to English law. The colonial assemblies approved



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
9 2 cha pter 4




Nicholas Scull,      new taxes and the colonial budgets. However, many of these assemblies
To the mayor,
                     saw it as their duty to check the power of the governor and ensure that
recorder, alder-
men, common          he did not take too much power within colonial government. Unlike Par-
council, and         liament, most of the men who were elected to an assembly came from
freemen of Phila-
delphia this plan    local districts, with their constituency able to hold their elected officials
of the improved      accountable to promises made.
part of the city
surveyed and laid        An elected assembly was an offshoot of the idea of civic duty, the no-
down by the late     tion that men had a responsibility to support and uphold the government
Nicholas Scull,
                     through voting, paying taxes, and service in the militia. Americans firmly
Philadelphia,
1762. Library of     accepted the idea of a social contract, the idea that government was put in
Congress.            place by the people. Philosophers such as Thomas Hobbes and John Locke
                     pioneered this idea, and there is evidence to suggest that these writers in-
                     fluenced the colonists. While in practice elites controlled colonial politics,
                     in theory many colonists believed in the notion of equality before the law
                     and opposed special treatment for any members of colonial society.
                         Whether African Americans, Native Americans, and women would
                     be included in this notion of equality before the law was far less clear.
                     Women’s role in the family became particularly complicated. Many histo-

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  93


rians view this period as a significant time of transition.19 Anglo-American
 families during the colonial period differed from their European counter-
 parts. Widely available land and plentiful natural resources allowed for
 greater fertility and thus encouraged more people to marry earlier in life.
 Yet while young marriages and large families were common throughout
 the colonial period, family sizes started to shrink by the end of the 1700s
 as wives asserted more control over their own bodies.
     New ideas governing romantic love helped change the nature of
­husband-wife relationships. Deriving from sentimentalism, a contempo-
 rary literary movement, many Americans began to view marriage as an
 emotionally fulfilling relationship rather than a strictly economic part-
 nership. Referring to one another as “Beloved of my Soul” or “My More
 Than Friend,” newspaper editor John Fenno and his wife Mary Cur-
 tis Fenno illustrate what some historians refer to as the “companionate
 ideal.”20 While away from his wife, John felt a “vacuum in my exis-
tence,” a sentiment returned by Mary’s “Doting Heart.”21 Indeed, after
independence, wives began to not only provide emotional sustenance to
their husbands but inculcate the principles of republican citizenship as
“republican wives.”22
     Marriage opened up new emotional realms for some but remained
oppressive for others. For the millions of Americans bound in chattel
slavery, marriage remained an informal arrangement rather than a codi-
fied legal relationship. For white women, the legal practice of coverture
meant that women lost all their political and economic rights to their
husband. Divorce rates rose throughout the 1790s, as did less formal
cases of abandonment. Newspapers published advertisements by de-
serted men and women denouncing their partners. Known as “elope-
ment notices,” they cataloged the misbehaviors of deviant spouses, such
as wives’ “indecent manner,” a way of implying sexual impropriety. As
violence and inequality continued in many American marriages, wives in
return highlighted their husbands’ “drunken fits” and violent rages. One
woman noted that her partner “presented his gun at my breast . . . and
swore he would kill me.”23
     That couples would turn to newspapers as a source of expression
illustrates the importance of what historians call print culture.24 Print
culture includes the wide range of factors contributing to how books and
other printed objects are made, including the relationship between the
author and the publisher, the technical constraints of the printer, and the
tastes of readers. In colonial America, regional differences in daily life



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
9 4 cha pter 4


        impacted the way colonists made and used printed matter. However, all
        the colonies dealt with threats of censorship and control from imperial
        supervision. In particular, political content stirred the most controversy.
            From the establishment of Virginia in 1607, printing was either re-
        garded as unnecessary given such harsh living conditions or actively dis-
        couraged. The governor of Virginia, Sir William Berkeley, summed up
        the attitude of the ruling class in 1671: “I thank God there are no free
        schools nor printing . . . for learning has brought disobedience, and her-
        esy . . . and printing has divulged them.”25 Ironically, the circulation
        of handwritten tracts contributed to Berkeley’s undoing. The popular-
        ity of Nathaniel Bacon’s uprising was in part due to widely circulated
        tracts questioning Berkeley’s competence. Berkeley’s harsh repression of
        Bacon’s Rebellion was equally well documented. It was only after Berke-
        ley’s death in 1677 that the idea of printing in the southern colonies was
        revived. William Nuthead, an experienced English printer, set up shop in
        1682, although the next governor of the colony, Thomas Culpeper, for-
        bade Nuthead from completing a single project. It wasn’t until William
        Parks set up his printing shop in Annapolis in 1726 that the Chesapeake
        had a stable local trade in printing and books.
            Print culture was very different in New England. Puritans had a re-
        spect for print from the beginning. Unfortunately, New England’s au-
        thors were content to publish in London, making the foundations of
        Stephen Daye’s first print shop in 1639 very shaky. Typically, printers
        made their money from printing sheets, not books to be bound. The case
        was similar in Massachusetts, where the first printed work was a Free-
        man’s Oath.26 The first book was not issued until 1640, the Bay Psalm
        Book, of which eleven known copies survive. Daye’s contemporaries rec-
        ognized the significance of his printing, and he was awarded 140 acres of
        land. The next large project, the first Bible to be printed in America, was
        undertaken by Samuel Green and Marmaduke Johnson and published in
        1660. That same year, the Eliot Bible, named for its translator John Eliot,
        was printed in the Natick dialect of the local Algonquin tribes.
            Massachusetts remained the center of colonial printing for a hundred
        years, until Philadelphia overtook Boston in 1770. Philadelphia’s rise as
        the printing capital of the colonies began with two important features:
        first, the arrival of Benjamin Franklin, a scholar and businessman, in
        1723, and second, waves of German immigrants who created a demand
        for a German-language press. From the mid-1730s, Christopher Sauer,
        and later his son, met the demand for German-language newspapers and



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  95




religious texts. Nevertheless, Franklin was a one-man culture of print,          Benjamin Franklin
                                                                                 and David Hall,
revolutionizing the book trade in addition to creating public learning ini-      printers, Pennsyl-
tiatives such as the Library Company and the Academy of Philadelphia.            vania Currency,
                                                                                 1764. Wikimedia.
His Autobiography offers one of the most detailed glimpses of life in a
eighteenth-century print shop. Franklin’s Philadelphia enjoyed a flurry of
newspapers, pamphlets, and books for sale. The flurry would only grow
in 1776, when the Philadelphia printer Robert Bell issued hundreds of
thousands of copies of Thomas Paine’s revolutionary Common Sense.
    Debates on religious expression continued throughout the eighteenth
century. In 1711, a group of New England ministers published a collec-
tion of sermons titled Early Piety. The most famous minister, Increase
Mather, wrote the preface. In it he asked the question, “What did our
forefathers come into this wilderness for?”27 His answer was simple: to
test their faith against the challenges of America and win. The grandchil-
dren of the first settlers had been born into the comfort of well-­established
colonies and worried that their faith had suffered. This sense of inferior-
ity sent colonists looking for a reinvigorated religious experience. The
result came to be known as the Great Awakening.
    Only with hindsight does the Great Awakening look like a unified
movement. The first revivals began unexpectedly in the Congregational
churches of New England in the 1730s and then spread through the
1740s and 1750s to Presbyterians, Baptists, and Methodists in the rest



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
9 6 cha pter 4


        of the thirteen colonies. Different places at different times experienced
        revivals of different intensities. Yet in all of these communities, colonists
        discussed the same need to strip their lives of worldly concerns and return
        to a more pious lifestyle. The form it took was something of a contradic-
        tion. Preachers became key figures in encouraging individuals to find a
        personal relationship with God.
            The first signs of religious revival appeared in Jonathan Edwards’
        congregation in Northampton, Massachusetts. Edwards was a theolo-
        gian who shared the faith of the early Puritan settlers. In particular, he
        believed in the idea of predestination, in which God had long ago de-
        cided who was damned and who was saved. However, Edwards worried
        that his congregation had stopped searching their souls and were merely
        doing good works to prove they were saved. With a missionary zeal,
        Edwards preached against worldly sins and called for his congregation
        to look inward for signs of God’s saving grace. His most famous sermon
        was “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God.” Suddenly, in the winter of
        1734, these sermons sent his congregation into violent convulsions. The
        spasms first appeared among known sinners in the community. Over the
        next six months the physical symptoms spread to half of the six hundred-
        person congregation. Edwards shared the work of his revival in a widely
        circulated pamphlet.
            Over the next decade itinerant preachers were more successful in
        spreading the spirit of revival around America. These preachers had the
        same spiritual goal as Edwards but brought with them a new religious ex-
        perience. They abandoned traditional sermons in favor of outside meet-
        ings where they could whip the congregation into an emotional frenzy to
        reveal evidence of saving grace. Many religious leaders were suspicious
        of the enthusiasm and message of these revivals, but colonists flocked to
        the spectacle.
            The most famous itinerant preacher was George Whitefield. According
        to Whitefield, the only type of faith that pleased God was heartfelt. The
        established churches too often only encouraged apathy. “The Christian
        World is dead asleep,” Whitefield explained. “Nothing but a loud voice
        can awaken them out of it.”28 He would be that voice. Whitefield was a
        former actor with a dramatic style of preaching and a simple message.
        Thundering against sin and for Jesus Christ, Whitefield invited ­everyone
        to be born again. It worked. Through the 1730s he traveled from New
        York to South Carolina converting ordinary men, women, and children.
        “I have seen upwards of a thousand people hang on his words with



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  97




George Whitefield is shown supported by two women, “Hypocrisy” and “Defeat.” The image also includes
other visual indications of the engraver’s disapproval of Whitefield, including a monkey and jester’s staff in
the right-hand corner. C. Corbett, publisher, Enthusiasm display’d: or, the Moor Fields congregation, 1739.
Library of Congress.


breathless silence,” wrote a socialite in Philadelphia, “broken only by
an occasional half suppressed sob.”29 A farmer recorded the powerful
impact this rhetoric could have: “And my hearing him preach gave me
a heart wound; by God’s blessing my old foundation was broken up,
and I saw that my righteousness would not save me.”30 The number of
people trying to hear Whitefield’s message was so large that he preached
in the meadows at the edges of cities. Contemporaries regularly testified
to crowds of thousands and in one case over twenty thousand in Phila-
delphia. Whitefield and the other itinerant preachers had achieved what
Edwards could not: making the revivals popular.
    Ultimately the religious revivals became a victim of the preachers’
success. As itinerant preachers became more experimental, they alienated
as many people as they converted. In 1742, one preacher from Connecti-
cut, James Davenport, persuaded his congregation that he had special



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
9 8 cha pter 4


                      knowledge from God. To be saved they had to dance naked in circles at
                      night while screaming and laughing. Or they could burn the books he
                      disapproved of. Either way, such extremism demonstrated for many that
                      revivalism had gone wrong.31 A divide appeared by the 1740s and 1750s
                      between “New Lights,” who still believed in a revived faith, and “Old
                      Lights,” who thought it was deluded nonsense.
                          By the 1760s, the religious revivals had petered out; however, they
                      left a profound impact on America. Leaders like Edwards and Whitefield
                      encouraged individuals to question the world around them. This idea
                      reformed religion in America and created a language of individualism
                      that promised to change everything else. If you challenged the Church,
                      what other authority figures might you question? The Great Awaken-
                      ing provided a language of individualism, reinforced in print culture,
                      which reappeared in the call for independence. While prerevolutionary
                      America had profoundly oligarchical qualities, the groundwork was laid
                      for a more republican society. However, society did not transform eas-
                      ily overnight. It would take intense, often physical, conflict to change
                      colonial life.


                      V. Seven Years’ War
                      Of the eighty-seven years between the Glorious Revolution (1688) and
                      the American Revolution (1775), Britain was at war with France and
                      French-allied Native Americans for thirty-seven of them. These were not
                      wars in which European soldiers fought other European soldiers. Ameri-
                      can militiamen fought for the British against French Catholics and their
                      Indian allies in all of these engagements. Warfare took a physical and
                      spiritual toll on British colonists. British towns located on the border
Christ Church,
Virginia. Library
                      between New England and New France experienced intermittent raiding
of Congress.          by French-allied Native Americans. Raiding parties destroyed houses and




                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  99


burned crops, but they also took captives. They brought these captives
to French Quebec, where some were ransomed back to their families in
New England and others converted to Catholicism and remained in New
France. In this sense, Catholicism threatened to capture Protestant lands
and souls.
    France and Britain feuded over the boundaries of their respective
North American empires. The feud turned bloody in 1754 when a force
of British colonists and Native American allies, led by young George
Washington, killed a French diplomat. This incident led to a war, which
would become known as the Seven Years’ War or the French and Indian
War. In North America, the French achieved victory in the early por-
tion of this war. They attacked and burned multiple British outposts,
such as Fort William Henry in 1757. In addition, the French seemed to
                                                                               Albert Bobbett,
easily defeat British attacks, such as General Braddock’s attack on Fort       engraver, Mont-
Duquesne, and General Abercrombie’s attack on Fort Carillon (Ticon-            calm trying to
                                                                               stop the massacre,
deroga) in 1758. These victories were often the result of alliances with       c. 1870–1880. Li-
Native Americans.                                                              brary of Congress.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
1 0 0 cha pter 4


            In Europe, the war did not fully begin until 1756, when British-allied
        Frederick II of Prussia invaded the neutral state of Saxony. As a result
        of this invasion, a massive coalition of France, Austria, Russia, and Swe-
        den attacked Prussia and the few German states allied with Prussia. The
        ruler of Austria, Maria Theresa, hoped to conquer the province of Sile-
        sia, which had been lost to Prussia in a previous war. In the European
        war, the British monetarily supported the Prussians, as well as the minor
        western German states of Hesse-Kassel and Braunschweig-­Wolfenbüttel.
        These subsidy payments enabled the smaller German states to fight
        France and allowed the excellent Prussian army to fight against the large
        enemy alliance.
            However, as in North America, the early part of the war went against
        the British. The French defeated Britain’s German allies and forced them
        to surrender after the Battle of Hastenbeck in 1757. That same year, the
        Austrians defeated the Prussians in the Battle of Kolín and Frederick of
        Prussia defeated the French at the Battle of Rossbach. The latter battle
        allowed the British to rejoin the war in Europe. Just a month later, in
        December 1757, Frederick’s army defeated the Austrians at the Battle of
        Leuthen, reclaiming the vital province of Silesia. In India and through-
        out the world’s oceans, the British and their fleet consistently defeated
        the French. In June, for instance, Robert Clive and his Indian allies had
        defeated the French at the Battle of Plassey. With the sea firmly in their
        control, the British could send additional troops to North America.
            These newly arrived soldiers allowed the British to launch new offen-
        sives. The large French port and fortress of Louisbourg, in present-day
        Nova Scotia, fell to the British in 1758. In 1759, British general James
        Wolfe defeated French general Louis-Joseph de Montcalm in the Battle
        of the Plains of Abraham, outside Quebec City. In Europe, 1759 saw
        the British defeat the French at the Battle of Minden and destroy large
        portions of the French fleet. The British referred to 1759 as the annus
        mirabilis or the year of miracles. These victories brought about the fall of
        French Canada, and war in North America ended in 1760 with the Brit-
        ish capture of Montreal. The British continued to fight against the Span-
        ish, who entered the war in 1762. In this war, the Spanish successfully
        defended Nicaragua against British attacks but were unable to prevent
        the conquest of Cuba and the Philippines.
            The Seven Years’ War ended with the peace treaties of Paris and Hu-
        bertusburg in 1763. The British received much of Canada and North
        America from the French, while the Prussians retained the important



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  101


province of Silesia. This gave the British a larger empire than they could
control, which contributed to tensions that would lead to revolution. In
particular, it exposed divisions within the newly expanded empire, in-
cluding language, national affiliation, and religious views. When the Brit-
ish captured Quebec in 1760, a newspaper distributed in the colonies to
celebrate the event boasted: “The time will come, when Pope and Friar/
Shall both be roasted in the fire/When the proud Antichristian whore/will
sink, and never rise more.”32
    American colonists rejoiced over the defeat of Catholic France and
felt secure that the Catholics in Quebec could no longer threaten them.
Of course, some American colonies had been a haven for religious mi-
norities since the seventeenth century. Catholic Maryland, for example,
evidenced early religious pluralism. But practical toleration of Catholics
existed alongside virulent anti-Catholicism in public and political arenas.
It was a powerful and enduring rhetorical tool borne out of warfare and
competition between Britain and France.
    In part because of constant conflict with Catholic France, Britons on
either side of the Atlantic rallied around Protestantism. British ministers
in England called for a coalition to fight French and Catholic empires.
Missionary organizations such as the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel were
founded at the turn of the eighteenth century to evangelize Native Ameri-
cans and limit Jesuit conversions. The Protestant revivals of the so-called
Great Awakening crisscrossed the Atlantic and founded a participatory
religious movement during the 1730s and 1740s that united British Prot-
estant churches. Preachers and merchants alike urged greater Atlantic
trade to bind the Anglophone Protestant Atlantic through commerce and
religion.


VI. Pontiac’s War
Relationships between colonists and Native Americans were complex
and often violent. In 1761, Neolin, a prophet, received a vision from his
religion’s main deity, known as the Master of Life. The Master of Life
told Neolin that the only way to enter heaven would be to cast off the
corrupting influence of Europeans by expelling the British from Indian
country: “This land where ye dwell I have made for you and not for
others. Whence comes it that ye permit the Whites upon your lands. . . .
Drive them out, make war upon them.”33 Neolin preached the avoidance



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
1 0 2 cha pter 4


        of alcohol, a return to traditional rituals, and pan-Indian unity to his
        disciples, including Pontiac, an Ottawa leader.
            Pontiac took Neolin’s words to heart and sparked the beginning of
        what would become known as Pontiac’s War. At its height, the pan-Indian
        uprising included Native peoples from the territory between the Great
        Lakes, the Appalachians, and the Mississippi River. Though Pontiac did
        not command all of the Indians participating in the war, his actions were
        influential in its development. Pontiac and three hundred Indian warriors
        sought to take Fort Detroit by surprise in May 1763, but the plan was
        foiled, resulting in a six-month siege of the British fort. News of the siege
        quickly spread throughout Indian country and inspired more attacks
        on British forts and settlers. In May, Native Americans captured Forts
        Sandusky, St. Joseph, and Miami. In June, a coalition of Ottawas and
        Ojibwes captured Fort Michilimackinac by staging a game of stickball
        (lacrosse) outside the fort. They chased the ball into the fort, gathered
        arms that had been smuggled in by a group of Native American women,
        and killed almost half of the fort’s British soldiers.
            Though these Indians were indeed responding to Neolin’s religious
        message, there were many other practical reasons for waging war on the
        British. After the Seven Years’ War, Britain gained control of formerly
        French territory as a result of the Treaty of Paris. Whereas the French had
        maintained a peaceful and relatively equal relationship with their Indian
        allies through trade, the British hoped to profit from and impose “order.”
        For example, the French often engaged in the Indian practice of diplo-
        matic gift giving. However, British general Jeffrey Amherst discouraged
        this practice and regulated the trade or sale of firearms and ammunition
        to Indians. Most Native Americans, including Pontiac, saw this not as
        frugal imperial policy but preparation for war.
            Pontiac’s War lasted until 1766. Native American warriors attacked
        British forts and frontier settlements, killing as many as four hundred
        soldiers and two thousand settlers.34 Disease and a shortage of supplies
        ultimately undermined the Indian war effort, and in July 1766 Pontiac
        met with British official and diplomat William Johnson at Fort Ontario
        and settled for peace. Though the western Indians did not win Pontiac’s
        War, they succeeded in fundamentally altering the British government’s
        Indian policy. The war made British officials recognize that peace in the
        West would require royal protection of Indian lands and heavy-handed
        regulation of Anglo-American trade activity in Indian country. During
        the war, the British Crown issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, which



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  103


created the proclamation line marking the Appalachian Mountains as the
boundary between Indian country and the British colonies.
    The effects of Pontiac’s War were substantial and widespread. The war
proved that coercion was not an effective strategy for imperial control,
though the British government would continue to employ this strategy
to consolidate their power in North America, most notably through the
various acts imposed on their colonies. Additionally, the prohibition of
Anglo-American settlement in Indian country, especially the Ohio River
Valley, sparked discontent. The French immigrant Michel-Guillaume-
Saint-Jean de Crèvecoeur articulated this discontent most clearly in his
1782 Letters from an American Farmer when he asked, “What then is the
American, this new man?” In other words, why did colonists start think-
ing of themselves as Americans, not Britons? Crèvecoeur suggested that
America was a melting pot of self-reliant individual landholders, fiercely
independent in pursuit of their own interests, and free from the burdens
of European class systems. It was an answer many wanted to hear and fit
with self-conceptions of the new nation, albeit one that imagined itself as
white, male, and generally Protestant.35 The Seven Years’ War pushed the
thirteen American colonies closer together politically and culturally than
ever before. In 1754, at the Albany Congress, Benjamin Franklin sug-
gested a plan of union to coordinate defenses across the continent. Tens
of thousands of colonials fought during the war. At the French surren-
der in 1760, 11,000 British soldiers joined 6,500 militia members drawn
from every colony north of Pennsylvania.36 At home, many heard or read
sermons that portrayed the war as a struggle between civilizations with
liberty-loving Britons arrayed against tyrannical Frenchmen and savage
Indians. American colonists rejoiced in their collective victory as a mo-
ment of newfound peace and prosperity. After nearly seven decades of
warfare they looked to the newly acquired lands west of the Appalachian
Mountains as their reward.
    The Seven Years’ War was tremendously expensive and precipitated
imperial reforms on taxation, commerce, and politics. Britain spent over
£140 million, an astronomical figure for the day, and the expenses kept
coming as new territory required new security obligations. Britain wanted
to recoup some of its expenses and looked to the colonies to share the
costs of their own security. To do this, Parliament started legislating over
all the colonies in a way rarely done before. As a result, the colonies
began seeing themselves as a collective group, rather than just distinct
entities. Different taxation schemes implemented across the c­olonies



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
1 0 4 cha pter 4




Benjamin Frank-      between 1763 and 1774 placed duties on items like tea, paper, molas-
lin, Join or Die,
May 9, 1754. Li-
                     ses, and stamps for almost every kind of document. Consumption and
brary of Congress.   trade, an important bond between Britain and the colonies, was being
                     threatened. To enforce these unpopular measures, Britain implemented
                     increasingly restrictive policies that eroded civil liberties like protection
                     from unlawful searches and jury trials. The rise of an antislavery move-
                     ment made many colonists worry that slavery would soon be attacked.
                     The moratorium on new settlements in the West after Pontiac’s War was
                     yet another disappointment.


                     VII. Conclusion
                     By 1763, Americans had never been more united. They fought and they
                     celebrated together. But they also recognized that they were not con-
                     sidered full British citizens, that they were considered something else.
                     Americans across the colonies viewed imperial reforms as threats to the
                     British liberties they saw as their birthright. The Stamp Act Congress
                     of 1765 brought colonial leaders together in an unprecedented show of
                     cooperation against taxes imposed by Parliament, and popular boycotts


               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  105


of British goods created a common narrative of sacrifice, resistance, and
shared political identity. A rebellion loomed.


VIII. Reference Material
This chapter was edited by Nora Slonimsky, with content contributions by Emily
Arendt, Ethan R. Bennett, John Blanton, Alexander Burns, Mary Draper, Jamie
Goodall, Jane Fiegen Green, Hendrick Isom, Kathryn Lasdow, Allison Madar,
Brooke Palmieri, Katherine Smoak, Christopher Sparshott, Ben Wright, and Gar-
rett Wright.
     Recommended citation: Emily Arendt et al., “Colonial Society,” Nora
Slonimsky, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright (Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).


Notes to Ch a p ter 4
     1. T. H. Breen, The Marketplace of Revolution: How Consumer Politics
Shaped American Independence (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
     2. Alvin Rabushka, Taxation in Colonial America (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2008), 360.
     3. T. H. Breen, “‘Baubles of Britain’: The American and Consumer Revolu-
tions of the Eighteenth Century,” Past and Present, 119, no. 1 (May 1988): 79.
     4. “To the Publisher of the Boston Evening Post,” Boston Evening Post,
no. 150 (June 6, 1738): 1.
     5. Richard B. Sheridan, Sugar and Slavery: An Economic History of the British
West Indies, 1623–1775 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974), 144.
     6. Archibald Paton Thornton, The Habit of Authority: Paternalism in British
History (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1966), 123.
     7. Cited in Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, The Age of Homespun: Objects and Sto-
ries in the Creation of an American Myth (New York: Knopf, 2001), 37.
     8. Gary B. Nash, The Urban Crucible: The Northern Seaports and the Ori-
gins of the American Revolution, Abridged Edition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2009), ix.
     9. Kenneth T. Jackson and Stanley K. Schultz, Cities in American History
(New York: Knopf, 1972), 45.
     10. Gary B. Nash, “Slaves and Slave Owners in Colonial Philadelphia,” in
African Americans in Pennsylvania: Shifting Historical Perspectives, ed. Joe Trot-
ter and Eric Ledell Smith (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press,
1997), 49–50.
     11. Donald Matthews, Religion in the Old South (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1977), 6.
     12. Robert Olwell, Masters, Slaves, & Subjects: The Culture of Power in the
South Carolina Lowcountry (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998), 67.
     13. Daniel C. Littlefield, Rice and Slaves: Ethnicity and the Slave Trade in
Colonial South Carolina (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991), 8.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
1 0 6 cha pter 4


            14. Sylvia R. Frey and Betty Wood, Come Shouting to Zion: African Ameri-
        can Protestantism in the American South and British Caribbean to 1830 (Chapel
        Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998).
            15. See Appendix D of Dorothy Schneider and Carl J. Schneider, Slavery in
        America (New York: Infobase, 2007).
            16. Thomas Joseph Davis, A Rumor of Revolt: The “Great Negro Plot” in
        Colonial New York (New York: Free Press, 1985).
            17. U.S. Census Bureau, “Colonial and Pre-Federal Statistics,” http://​www2​
        .census​.gov/​prod2/​statcomp/​documents/​CT1970p2​-13​.pdf, accessed April 24,
        2018; James Oliver Horton, and Lois E. Horton, Black Bostonians: Family Life
        and Community Struggle in the Antebellum North (New York: Holmes and
        Meier, 1999), xiv.
            18. Elaine F. Crane, “‘The First Wheel of Commerce’: Newport, Rhode Is-
        land and the Slave Trade, 1760–1776,” Slavery and Abolition 1, no. 2 (1980):
        178–198.
            19. Rosemarie Zagarri, Revolutionary Backlash: Women and Politics in the
        Early American Republic (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007).
            20. Lucia McMahon, Mere Equals: The Paradox of Educated Women in the
        Early American Republic (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2012).
            21. Fenno-Hoffman Family Papers, Clements Library, University of Michi-
        gan, Ann Arbor; Anya Jabour, Marriage in the Early Republic: Elizabeth and
        William Wirt and the Companionate Ideal (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
        Press, 1998).
            22. Jan Lewis, “The Republican Wife: Virtue and Seduction in the Early Re-
        public,” William and Mary Quarterly 44, no. 4 (1987): 689–721.
            23. New York Packet, January 9, 1790; New-Jersey Journal, January 20,
        1790; Mary Beth Sievens, Stray Wives: Marital Conflict in Early National New
        England (New York: New York University Press, 2005).
            24. Trish Loughran, The Republic in Print: Print Culture in the Age of U.S.
        Nation-Building, 1770–1870 (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007).
            25. Cited in David D. Hall, Cultures in Print: Essays in the History of the
        Book (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1996), 99.
            26. Hugh Amory and David D. Hall, A History of the Book in America:
        Volume 1, The Colonial Book in the Atlantic World (New York: Cambridge Uni-
        versity Press, 2000): 111.
            27. John Gillies, Historical Collections Relating to the Remarkable Suc-
        cess of the Gospel and Eminent Instruments Employed in Promoting It, Vol. II
        (Glasgow: Foulis, 1754), 19.
            28. George Whitefield, The Works of the Reverend George Whitefield, Vol. I
        (London: Dilly, 1771), 73.
            29. William G. McLoughlin, Revivals, Awakenings, and Reform (Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press, 1978), 62.
            30. Thomas S. Kidd, George Whitefield: America’s Spiritual Founding Father
        (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2014), 131.




  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
C ol on ia l S o ci e t y  107


    31. Leigh Eric Schmidt, “‘A Second and Glorious Reformation’: The New
Light Extremism of Andrew Croswell,” William and Mary Quarterly 43, no. 2
(April 1986), 214–244.
    32. “Canada Subjected: A New Song” ([n.p., 1760?]), quoted in Thomas
Kidd, God of Liberty: A Religious History of the American Revolution (New
York: Basic Books, 2010), 29.
    33. Daniel K. Richter, Before the Revolution: America’s Ancient Pasts (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 403.
    34. Gregory Evans Dowd, War Under Heaven: Pontiac, the Indian Nations,
and British Empire (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004).
    35. Read de Crèvecoeur’s Letters from an American Farmer online at http://​
xroads​.virginia​.edu/​~hyper/​crev/​home​.html.
    36. Fred Anderson, Crucible of War: The Seven Years’ War and the Fate of
Empire in British North America, 1754–1766 (New York: Knopf Doubleday,
2007), 410.

R e c omm e n d e d R e a di n g
Anishanslin, Zara. Portrait of a Woman in Silk: Hidden Histories of the British
    Atlantic World. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2016.
Breen, T. H. The Marketplace of Revolution: How Consumer Politics Shaped
    American Independence. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Bushman, Richard L. The Refinement of America: Persons, Houses, Cities. New
    York: Vintage Books, 1992.
Butler, Jon. Becoming America: The Revolution Before 1776. Cambridge, MA:
    Harvard University Press, 2001.
Carp, Benjamin L. Rebels Rising: Cities and the American Revolution. New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Carté-Engel, Katherine. Religion and Profit: Moravians in Early America. Phila-
    delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009.
Demos, John P. The Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story from Early America.
    New York: Vintage Books, 1994.
Dowd, Gregory Evans. War Under Heaven: Pontiac, the Indian Nations, and
    British Empire. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004.
Frey, Sylvia R., and Betty Wood. Come Shouting to Zion: African American Prot-
    estantism in the American South and British Caribbean to 1830. Chapel Hill:
    University of North Carolina Press, 1998.
Hackel, Heidi Brayman, and Catherine E. Kelly, eds. Reading Women: Literacy,
    Authorship, and Culture in the Atlantic World, 1500–1800. Philadelphia:
    University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009.
Hancock, David. Citizens of the World: London Merchants and the Integration
    of the British Atlantic Community, 1735–1785. New York: Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press, 1997.
Heyrman, Christine. Southern Cross: The Beginnings of the Bible Belt. New
    York: Knopf, 1997.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
1 0 8 cha pter 4


        Holton, Woody. Forced Founders: Indians, Debtors, Slaves, and the Making of
            the American Revolution in Virginia. Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
            lina Press, 1999.
        Klepp, Susan E. Revolutionary Conceptions: Women, Fertility, and Family Limi-
            tation in America, 1760–1820. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
            Press, 2009.
        Lepore, Jill. New York Burning: Liberty, Slavery, and Conspiracy in Eighteenth-
            Century Manhattan. New York: Vintage Books, 2005.
        McConville, Brendan. The King’s Three Faces: The Rise and Fall of Royal Amer-
            ica, 1688–1776. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007.
        Merritt, Jane T. At the Crossroads: Indians and Empires on a Mid–Atlantic Fron-
            tier, 1700-1763. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.
        Podruchny, Carolyn. Making the Voyageur World: Travelers and Traders in the
            North American Fur Trade. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2006.
        Richter, Daniel K. Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of Early
            America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.
        Sensbach, Jon F. Rebecca’s Revival: Creating Black Christianity in the Atlantic
            World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006.
        Sheridan, Richard B. Sugar and Slavery: An Economic History of the British West
            Indies, 1623–1775. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974.
        Taylor, Alan. The Divided Ground: Indians, Settlers, and the Northern Border-
            land of the American Revolution. New York: Vintage Books, 2006.
        Ulrich, Laurel Thatcher. The Age of Homespun: Objects and Stories in the Cre-
            ation of an American Myth. New York: Knopf, 2001.
        ———. A Midwife’s Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard, Based on Her Diary,
            1785–1812. New York: Knopf, 1990.
        Zabin, Serena R. Dangerous Economies: Status and Commerce in Imperial New
            York. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011.




  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
5
The American Revolution

I. Introduction
In the 1760s, Benjamin Rush, a native of Philadelphia, recounted a visit       Paul Revere,
                                                                               Landing of the
to Parliament. Upon seeing the king’s throne in the House of Lords, Rush       Troops, c. 1770.
said he “felt as if he walked on sacred ground” with “emotions that            Courtesy Ameri-
                                                                               can Antiquarian
I cannot describe.”1 Throughout the eighteenth century, colonists had
                                                                               Society. Attribu-
developed significant emotional ties with both the British monarchy and        tion-NonCommer-
the British constitution. The British North American colonists had just        cial-ShareAlike
                                                                               4.0 International
helped to win a world war and most, like Rush, had never been more             (CC BY-NC-SA
proud to be British. And yet, in a little over a decade, those same colo-      4.0).
nists would declare their independence and break away from the British
Empire. Seen from 1763, nothing would have seemed as improbable as
the American Revolution.
    The Revolution built institutions and codified the language and ideas
that still define Americans’ image of themselves. Moreover, revolutionar-

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
110                                                                         ch a pter 5


             ies justified their new nation with radical new ideals that changed the
             course of history and sparked a global “age of revolution.” But the Revo-
             lution was as paradoxical as it was unpredictable. A revolution fought
             in the name of liberty allowed slavery to persist. Resistance to central-
             ized authority tied disparate colonies ever closer together under new gov-
             ernments. The revolution created politicians eager to foster republican
             selflessness and protect the public good but also encouraged individual
             self-interest and personal gain. The “founding fathers” instigated and
             fought a revolution to secure independence from Britain, but they did
             not fight that revolution to create a “democracy.” To successfully rebel
             against Britain, however, required more than a few dozen “founding fa-
             thers.” Common colonists joined the fight, unleashing popular forces
             that shaped the Revolution itself, often in ways not welcomed by elite
             leaders. But once unleashed, these popular forces continued to shape the
             new nation and indeed the rest of American history.


             II. The Origins of the American Revolution
             The American Revolution had both long-term origins and short-term
             causes. In this section, we will look broadly at some of the long-term
             political, intellectual, cultural, and economic developments in the eigh-
             teenth century that set the context for the crisis of the 1760s and 1770s.
                 Between the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the middle of the eigh-
             teenth century, Britain had largely failed to define the colonies’ relation-
             ship to the empire and institute a coherent program of imperial reform.
             Two factors contributed to these failures. First, Britain was at war from
             the War of the Spanish Succession at the start of the century through the
             Seven Years’ War in 1763. Constant war was politically consuming and
             economically expensive. Second, competing visions of empire divided Brit-
             ish officials. Old Whigs and their Tory supporters envisioned an authori-
             tarian empire, based on conquering territory and extracting resources.
             They sought to eliminate Britain’s growing national debt by raising taxes
             and cutting spending on the colonies. The radical (or patriot) Whigs based
             their imperial vision on trade and manufacturing instead of land and re-
             sources. They argued that economic growth, not raising taxes, would solve
             the national debt. Instead of an authoritarian empire, “patriot Whigs”
             argued that the colonies should have equal status with the mother coun-
             try. There were occasional attempts to reform the administration of the
             colonies, but debate between the two sides prevented coherent reform.2



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 111


    Colonists developed their own understanding of how they fit into
the empire. They saw themselves as British subjects “entitled to all
the natural, essential, inherent, and inseparable rights of our fellow
subjects in Great-Britain.” The eighteenth century brought significant
economic and demographic growth in the colonies. This success, they
believed, resulted partly from Britain’s hands-off approach to the colo-
nies. By midcentury, colonists believed that they held a special place in
the empire, which justified Britain’s hands-off policy. In 1764, James
Otis Jr. wrote, “The colonists are entitled to as ample rights, liberties,
and privileges as the subjects of the mother country are, and in some
respects to more.”3
    In this same period, the colonies developed their own local political
institutions. Samuel Adams, in the Boston Gazette, described the colo-
nies as each being a “separate body politic” from Britain. Almost imme-
diately upon each colony’s settlement, they created a colonial assembly.
These assemblies assumed many of the same duties as the Commons ex-
ercised in Britain, including taxing residents, managing the spending of
the colonies’ revenue, and granting salaries to royal officials. In the early
1700s, colonial leaders unsuccessfully lobbied the British government to
define their assemblies’ legal prerogatives, but Britain was too occupied
with European wars. In the first half of the eighteenth century, royal
governors tasked by the Board of Trade attempted to limit the power
of the assemblies, but the assemblies’ power only grew. Many colonists
came to see their assemblies as having the same jurisdiction over them
that Parliament exercised over those in England. They interpreted British
inaction as justifying their tradition of local governance. The Crown and
Parliament, however, disagreed.4
    Colonial political culture in the colonies also developed differently
than that of the mother country. In both Britain and the colonies, land
was the key to political participation, but because land was more eas-
ily obtained in the colonies, a higher proportion of male colonists par-
ticipated in politics. Colonial political culture drew inspiration from the
“country” party in Britain. These ideas—generally referred to as the
ideology of republicanism—stressed the corrupting nature of power and
the need for those involved in self-governing to be virtuous (i.e., putting
the “public good” over their own self-interest). Patriots would need to be
ever vigilant against the rise of conspiracies, centralized control, and tyr-
anny. Only a small fringe in Britain held these ideas, but in the colonies,
they were widely accepted.5



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
112                                                                           ch a pter 5


                 In the 1740s, two seemingly conflicting bodies of thought—the En-
             lightenment and the Great Awakening—began to combine in the colonies
             and challenge older ideas about authority. Perhaps no single philosopher
             had a greater impact on colonial thinking than John Locke. In his Essay
             Concerning Human Understanding, Locke argued that the mind was
             originally a tabula rasa (or blank slate) and that individuals were formed
             primarily by their environment. The aristocracy then were wealthy or
             successful because they had greater access to wealth, education, and pa-
             tronage and not because they were innately superior. Locke followed this
             essay with Some Thoughts Concerning Education, which introduced
             radical new ideas about the importance of education. Education would
             produce rational human beings capable of thinking for themselves and
             questioning authority rather than tacitly accepting tradition. These ideas
             slowly came to have far-reaching effects in the colonies and, later, the
             new nation.
                 At the same time that Locke’s ideas about knowledge and education
             spread in North America, the colonies also experienced an unprecedented
             wave of evangelical Protestant revivalism. Between 1739 and 1740, the
             Rev. George Whitefield, an enigmatic, itinerant preacher, traveled the col-
             onies preaching Calvinist sermons to huge crowds. Unlike the rationalism
             of Locke, his sermons were designed to appeal to his listeners’ emotions.
             Whitefield told his listeners that salvation could only be found by taking
             personal responsibility for one’s own unmediated relationship with God,
             a process that came to be known as a “conversion” experience. He also
             argued that the current Church hierarchies populated by “unconverted”
             ministers only stood as a barrier between the individual and God. In his
             wake, new traveling preachers picked up his message and many congre-
             gations split. Both Locke and Whitefield had empowered individuals to
             question authority and to take their lives into their own hands.
                 In other ways, eighteenth-century colonists were becoming more cul-
             turally similar to Britons, a process often referred to as Anglicization.
             As colonial economies grew, they quickly became an important market
             for British manufacturing exports. Colonists with disposable income
             and access to British markets attempted to mimic British culture. By the
             middle of the eighteenth century, middling-class colonists could also af-
             ford items previously thought of as luxuries like British fashions, dining
             wares, and more. The desire to purchase British goods meshed with the
             desire to enjoy British liberties.6 These political, intellectual, cultural, and
             economic developments built tensions that rose to the surface when, after



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 113


the Seven Years’ War, Britain finally began to implement a program of
imperial reform that conflicted with colonists’ understanding of the em-
pire and their place in it.


III. The Causes of the American Revolution
Most immediately, the American Revolution resulted directly from at-
tempts to reform the British Empire after the Seven Years’ War. The
Seven Years’ War culminated nearly a half century of war between Eu-
rope’s imperial powers. It was truly a world war, fought between multi-
ple empires on multiple continents. At its conclusion, the British Empire
had never been larger. Britain now controlled the North American con-
tinent east of the Mississippi River, including French Canada. It had also
consolidated its control over India. But the realities and responsibilities
of the postwar empire were daunting. War (let alone victory) on such a
scale was costly. Britain doubled the national debt to 13.5 times its an-
nual revenue. Britain faced significant new costs required to secure and
defend its far-flung empire, especially the western frontiers of the North
American colonies. These factors led Britain in the 1760s to attempt to
consolidate control over its North American colonies, which, in turn,
led to resistance.
    King George III took the crown in 1760 and brought Tories into his
government after three decades of Whig rule. They represented an au-
thoritarian vision of empire in which colonies would be subordinate. The
Royal Proclamation of 1763 was Britain’s first major postwar imperial
action targeting North America. The king forbade settlement west of the
Appalachian Mountains in an attempt to limit costly wars with Native
Americans. Colonists, however, protested and demanded access to the
territory for which they had fought alongside the British.
    In 1764, Parliament passed two more reforms. The Sugar Act sought
to combat widespread smuggling of molasses in New England by cutting
the duty in half but increasing enforcement. Also, smugglers would be
tried by vice-admiralty courts and not juries. Parliament also passed the
Currency Act, which restricted colonies from producing paper money.
Hard money, such as gold and silver coins, was scarce in the colonies.
The lack of currency impeded the colonies’ increasingly sophisticated
transatlantic economies, but it was especially damaging in 1764 because
a postwar recession had already begun. Between the restrictions of the
Proclamation of 1763, the Currency Act, and the Sugar Act’s canceling



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
114                                                                         ch a pter 5


             of trials-by-jury for smugglers, some colonists began to fear a pattern of
             increased taxation and restricted liberties.
                 In March 1765, Parliament passed the Stamp Act. The act required
             that many documents be printed on paper that had been stamped to show
             the duty had been paid, including newspapers, pamphlets, diplomas,
             legal documents, and even playing cards. The Sugar Act of 1764 was an
             attempt to get merchants to pay an already existing duty, but the Stamp
             Act created a new, direct (or “internal”) tax. Parliament had never before
             directly taxed the colonists. Instead, colonies contributed to the empire
             through the payment of indirect, “external” taxes, such as customs du-
             ties. In 1765, Daniel Dulany of Maryland wrote, “A right to impose an
             internal tax on the colonies, without their consent for the single purpose
             of revenue, is denied, a right to regulate their trade without their con-
             sent is, admitted.”7 Also, unlike the Sugar Act, which primarily affected
             merchants, the Stamp Act directly affected numerous groups throughout
             colonial society, including printers, lawyers, college graduates, and even
             sailors who played cards. This led, in part, to broader, more popular
             resistance.
                 Resistance to the Stamp Act took three forms, distinguished largely
             by class: legislative resistance by elites, economic resistance by merchants,
             and popular protest by common colonists. Colonial elites responded by
             passing resolutions in their assemblies. The most famous of the anti-
             Stamp Act resolutions were the Virginia Resolves, passed by the House
             of Burgesses on May 30, 1765, which declared that the colonists were
             entitled to “all the liberties, privileges, franchises, and immunities . . .
             possessed by the people of Great Britain.” When the Virginia Resolves
             were printed throughout the colonies, however, they often included a
             few extra, far more radical resolutions not passed by the Virginia House
             of Burgesses, the last of which asserted that only “the general assembly
             of this colony have any right or power to impose or lay any taxation”
             and that anyone who argued differently “shall be deemed an enemy to
             this his majesty’s colony.”8 These additional items spread throughout the
             colonies and helped radicalize subsequent responses in other colonial
             assemblies. These responses eventually led to the calling of the Stamp
             Act Congress in New York City in October 1765. Nine colonies sent
             delegates, who included Benjamin Franklin, John Dickinson, Thomas
             Hutchinson, Philip Livingston, and James Otis.9
                 The Stamp Act Congress issued a “Declaration of Rights and Griev-
             ances,” which, like the Virginia Resolves, declared allegiance to the king



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 115




                                                          Men and women politicized the domestic
                                                          sphere by buying and displaying items
                                                          that conspicuously revealed their position
                                                          for or against parliamentary actions.
                                                          This witty teapot, which celebrates the
                                                          end of taxation on goods like tea itself,
                                                          makes clear the owner’s perspective on
                                                          the egregious taxation. Teapot, Stamp Act
                                                          Repeal’d, 1786. Courtesy of the Peabody
                                                          Essex Museum, Salem, MA.


and “all due subordination” to Parliament but also reasserted the idea
that colonists were entitled to the same rights as Britons. Those rights
included trial by jury, which had been abridged by the Sugar Act, and
the right to be taxed only by their own elected representatives. As Daniel
Dulany wrote in 1765, “It is an essential principle of the English constitu-
tion, that the subject shall not be taxed without his consent.”10 Benjamin
Franklin called it the “prime Maxim of all free Government.”11 Because
the colonies did not elect members to Parliament, they believed that they
were not represented and could not be taxed by that body. In response,
Parliament and the Crown argued that the colonists were “virtually rep-
resented,” just like the residents of those boroughs or counties in England
that did not elect members to Parliament. However, the colonists rejected
the notion of virtual representation, with one pamphleteer calling it a
“monstrous idea.”12
    The second type of resistance to the Stamp Act was economic. While
the Stamp Act Congress deliberated, merchants in major port cities were
preparing nonimportation agreements, hoping that their refusal to im-
port British goods would lead British merchants to lobby for the repeal
of the Stamp Act. In New York City, “upwards of two hundred princi-
pal merchants” agreed not to import, sell, or buy “any goods, wares, or
merchandises” from Great Britain.13 In Philadelphia, merchants ­gathered



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
116                                                                         ch a pter 5


             at “a general meeting” to agree that “they would not Import any Goods
             from Great-Britain until the Stamp-Act was Repealed.”14 The plan
             worked. By January 1766, London merchants sent a letter to Parliament
             arguing that they had been “reduced to the necessity of pending ruin” by
             the Stamp Act and the subsequent boycotts.15
                 The third, and perhaps, most crucial type of resistance was popu-
             lar protest. Riots broke out in Boston. Crowds burned the appointed
             stamp distributor for Massachusetts, Andrew Oliver, in effigy and pulled
             a building he owned “down to the Ground in five minutes.”16 Oliver
             resigned the position the next day. The following week, a crowd also
             set upon the home of his brother-in-law, Lieutenant Governor Thomas
             Hutchinson, who had publicly argued for submission to the stamp tax.
             Before the evening was over, much of Hutchinson’s home and belongings
             had been destroyed.17
                 Popular violence and intimidation spread quickly throughout the col-
             onies. In New York City, posted notices read:

                PRO PATRIA,
                The first Man that either
                distributes or makes use of Stampt
                Paper, let him take care of
                his House, Person, & Effects.
                Vox Populi;
                We dare.”18

                 By November 16, all of the original twelve stamp distributors had
             resigned, and by 1766, groups calling themselves the Sons of Liberty
             were formed in most colonies to direct and organize further resistance.
             These tactics had the dual effect of sending a message to Parliament and
             discouraging colonists from accepting appointments as stamp collectors.
             With no one to distribute the stamps, the act became unenforceable.
                 Pressure on Parliament grew until, in February 1766, it repealed the
             Stamp Act. But to save face and to try to avoid this kind of problem in
             the future, Parliament also passed the Declaratory Act, asserting that Par-
             liament had the “full power and authority to make laws . . . to bind the
             colonies and people of America . . . in all cases whatsoever.” However,
             colonists were too busy celebrating the repeal of the Stamp Act to take
             much notice of the Declaratory Act. In New York City, the inhabitants
             raised a huge lead statue of King George III in honor of the Stamp Act’s
             repeal. It could be argued that there was no moment at which colonists



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 117




                                                          Violent protest by groups like the Sons of
                                                          Liberty created quite a stir in the colo-
                                                          nies and in England. While extreme acts
                                                          like the tarring and feathering of Bos-
                                                          ton’s commissioner of customs in 1774
                                                          propagated more protest against symbols
                                                          of Parliament’s tyranny throughout the
                                                          colonies, violent demonstrations were
                                                          regarded as acts of terrorism by British
                                                          officials. This print of the 1774 event was
                                                          from the British perspective, picturing
                                                          the Sons as brutal instigators with almost
                                                          demonic smiles on their faces as they
                                                          enacted this excruciating punishment on
                                                          the customs commissioner. Philip Dawe
                                                          (attributed), The Bostonians Paying the
                                                          Excise-man, or Tarring and Feathering.
                                                          Wikimedia.

felt more proud to be members of the free British Empire than 1766. But
Britain still needed revenue from the colonies.19
    The colonies had resisted the implementation of direct taxes, but the
Declaratory Act reserved Parliament’s right to impose them. And, in the
colonists’ dispatches to Parliament and in numerous pamphlets, they
had explicitly acknowledged the right of Parliament to regulate colonial
trade. So Britain’s next attempt to draw revenues from the colonies, the
Townshend Acts, were passed in June 1767, creating new customs du-
ties on common items, like lead, glass, paint, and tea, instead of direct
taxes. The acts also created and strengthened formal mechanisms to en-
force compliance, including a new American Board of Customs Commis-
sioners and more vice-admiralty courts to try smugglers. Revenues from
customs seizures would be used to pay customs officers and other royal
officials, including the governors, thereby incentivizing them to convict
offenders. These acts increased the presence of the British government in
the colonies and circumscribed the authority of the colonial assemblies,
since paying the governor’s salary had long given the assemblies signifi-
cant power over them. Unsurprisingly, colonists, once again, resisted.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
118                                                                         ch a pter 5


                 Even though these were duties, many colonial resistance authors still
             referred to them as “taxes,” because they were designed primarily to
             extract revenues from the colonies not to regulate trade. John Dickinson,
             in his “Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania,” wrote, “That we may
             legally be bound to pay any general duties on these commodities, relative
             to the regulation of trade, is granted; but we being obliged by her laws
             to take them from Great Britain, any special duties imposed on their
             exportation to us only, with intention to raise a revenue from us only,
             are as much taxes upon us, as those imposed by the Stamp Act.” Hence,
             many authors asked: once the colonists assented to a tax in any form,
             what would stop the British from imposing ever more and greater taxes
             on the colonists?20
                 New forms of resistance emerged in which elite, middling, and
             working-class colonists participated together. Merchants reinstituted
             ­
             nonimportation agreements, and common colonists agreed not to con-
             sume these same products. Lists were circulated with signatories prom-
             ising not to buy any British goods. These lists were often published in
             newspapers, bestowing recognition on those who had signed and led to
             pressure on those who had not.
                 Women, too, became involved to an unprecedented degree in re-
             sistance to the Townshend Acts. They circulated subscription lists and
             gathered signatures. The first political commentaries in newspapers writ-
             ten by women appeared.21 Also, without new imports of British clothes,
             colonists took to wearing simple, homespun clothing. Spinning clubs
             were formed, in which local women would gather at one of their homes
             and spin cloth for homespun clothing for their families and even for the
             community.22
                 Homespun clothing quickly became a marker of one’s virtue and pa-
             triotism, and women were an important part of this cultural shift. At
             the same time, British goods and luxuries previously desired now be-
             came symbols of tyranny. Nonimportation and, especially, nonconsump-
             tion agreements changed colonists’ cultural relationship with the mother
             country. Committees of Inspection monitored merchants and residents
             to make sure that no one broke the agreements. Offenders could expect
             to be shamed by having their names and offenses published in the news­
             paper and in broadsides.
                 Nonimportation and nonconsumption helped forge colonial unity.
             Colonies formed Committees of Correspondence to keep each other in-
             formed of the resistance efforts throughout the colonies. Newspapers



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 119


reprinted exploits of resistance, giving colonists a sense that they were
part of a broader political community. The best example of this new
“continental conversation” came in the wake of the Boston Massacre.
Britain sent regiments to Boston in 1768 to help enforce the new acts and
quell the resistance. On the evening of March 5, 1770, a crowd gathered
outside the Custom House and began hurling insults, snowballs, and per-
haps more at the young sentry. When a small number of soldiers came
to the sentry’s aid, the crowd grew increasingly hostile until the soldiers
fired. After the smoke cleared, five Bostonians were dead, including one of
the ringleaders, Crispus Attucks, a former slave turned free dockworker.
The soldiers were tried in Boston and won acquittal, thanks, in part, to
their defense attorney, John Adams. News of the Boston Massacre spread
quickly through the new resistance communication networks, aided by
a famous engraving initially circulated by Paul Revere, which depicted
bloodthirsty British soldiers with grins on their faces firing into a peaceful
crowd. The engraving was quickly circulated and reprinted throughout
the colonies, generating sympathy for Boston and anger with Britain.
    Resistance again led to repeal. In March 1770, Parliament repealed
all of the new duties except the one on tea, which, like the Declaratory




                                                           This iconic image of the Boston Massa-
                                                           cre by Paul Revere sparked fury in both
                                                           Americans and the British by portraying
                                                           the redcoats as brutal slaughterers and
                                                           the onlookers as helpless victims. The
                                                           events of March 5, 1770, did not actually
                                                           play out as Revere pictured them, yet his
                                                           intention was not simply to recount the
                                                           affair. Revere created an effective propa-
                                                           ganda piece that lent credence to those
                                                           demanding that the British authoritarian
                                                           rule be stopped. Paul Revere (engraver),
                                                           The bloody massacre perpetrated in King
                                                           Street Boston on March 5th 1770 by a
                                                           party of the 29th Regt., 1770. Library of
                                                           Congress.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
120                                                                          ch a pter 5


             Act, was left, in part, to save face and assert that Parliament still retained
             the right to tax the colonies. The character of colonial resistance had
             changed between 1765 and 1770. During the Stamp Act resistance, elites
             wrote resolves and held congresses while violent, popular mobs burned
             effigies and tore down houses, with minimal coordination between colo-
             nies. But methods of resistance against the Townshend Acts became more
             inclusive and more coordinated. Colonists previously excluded from
             meaningful political participation now gathered signatures, and colonists
             of all ranks participated in the resistance by not buying British goods and
             monitoring and enforcing the boycotts.
                 Britain’s failed attempts at imperial reform in the 1760s created an
             increasingly vigilant and resistant colonial population and, most impor-
             tantly, an enlarged political sphere—both on the colonial and continental
             levels—far beyond anything anyone could have imagined a few years
             earlier. A new sense of shared grievances began to join the colonists in a
             shared American political identity.


             IV. Independence
             Tensions between the colonies and England eased for a time after the
             Boston Massacre. The colonial economy improved as the postwar reces-
             sion receded. The Sons of Liberty in some colonies sought to continue
             nonimportation even after the repeal of the Townshend Acts. But in New
             York, a door-to-door poll of the population revealed that the majority
             wanted to end nonimportation.23 Yet Britain’s desire and need to reform
             imperial administration remained.
                 In April 1773, Parliament passed two acts to aid the failing East India
             Company, which had fallen behind in the annual payments it owed Brit-
             ain. But the company was not only drowning in debt; it was also drown-
             ing in tea, with almost fifteen million pounds of it in stored in warehouses
             from India to England. In 1773, Parliament passed the Regulating Act,
             which effectively put the troubled company under government control. It
             then passed the Tea Act, which would allow the company to sell its tea
             in the colonies directly and without the usual import duties. This would
             greatly lower the cost of tea for colonists, but, again, they resisted.
                 Merchants resisted the Tea Act because they resented the East India
             Company’s monopoly. But like the Sugar Act, the Tea Act affected only
             a small, specific group of people. The widespread support for resisting
             the Tea Act had more to do with principles. By buying tea, even though



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 121


it was cheaper, colonists would be paying the duty and thereby implicitly
acknowledging Parliament’s right to tax them. According to the Pennsyl-
vania Chronicle, Prime Minister Lord North was a “great schemer” who
sought “to out wit us, and to effectually establish that Act, which will
forever after be pleaded as a precedent for every imposition the Parlia-
ment of Great-Britain shall think proper to saddle us with.”24
    The Tea Act stipulated that the duty had to be paid when the ship
unloaded. Newspaper essays and letters throughout the summer of 1773
in the major port cities debated what to do upon the ships’ arrival. In
November, the Boston Sons of Liberty, led by Samuel Adams and John
Hancock, resolved to “prevent the landing and sale of the [tea], and the
payment of any duty thereon” and to do so “at the risk of their lives
and property.”25 The meeting appointed men to guard the wharfs and
make sure the tea remained on the ships until they returned to London.
This worked and the tea did not reach the shore, but by December 16,
the ships were still there. Hence, another town meeting was held at the
Old South Meeting House, at the end of which dozens of men disguised
as Mohawk Indians made their way to the wharf. The Boston Gazette
reported what happened next:

   But, behold what followed! A number of brave & resolute men, deter-
   mined to do all in their power to save their country from the ruin which
   their enemies had plotted, in less than four hours, emptied every chest of
   tea on board the three ships . . . amounting to 342 chests, into the sea ! !
   without the least damage done to the ships or any other property.26

    As word spread throughout the colonies, patriots were emboldened
to do the same to the tea sitting in their harbors. Tea was either dumped
or seized in Charleston, Philadelphia, and New York, with numerous
other smaller “tea parties” taking place throughout 1774.
    Popular protest spread across the continent and down through all lev-
els of colonial society. Fifty-one women in Edenton, North Carolina, for
example, signed an agreement—published in numerous newspapers—in
which they promised “to do every Thing as far as lies in our Power” to
support the boycotts.27 The ladies of Edenton were not alone in their de-
sire to support the war effort by what means they could. Women across
the thirteen colonies could most readily express their political sentiments
as consumers and producers. Because women often made decisions re-
garding household purchases, their participation in consumer boycotts
held particular weight.28 Some women also took to the streets as part of



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
122                                                                         ch a pter 5


             more unruly mob actions, participating in grain riots, raids on the offices
             of royal officials, and demonstrations against the impressment of men
             into naval service. The agitation of so many helped elicit responses from
             both Britain and the colonial elites.
                 Britain’s response was swift. The following spring, Parliament passed
             four acts known collectively, by the British, as the Coercive Acts. Colo-
             nists, however, referred to them as the Intolerable Acts. First, the Boston
             Port Act shut down the harbor and cut off all trade to and from the city.
             The Massachusetts Government Act put the colonial government entirely
             under British control, dissolving the assembly and restricting town meet-
             ings. The Administration of Justice Act allowed any royal official accused
             of a crime to be tried in Britain rather than by Massachusetts courts and
             juries. Finally, the Quartering Act, passed for all colonies, allowed the
             British army to quarter newly arrived soldiers in colonists’ homes. Boston
             had been deemed in open rebellion, and the king, his advisors, and Parlia-
             ment acted decisively to end the rebellion.
                 The Crown, however, did not anticipate the other colonies coming
             to the aid of Massachusetts. Colonists collected food to send to Boston.
             Virginia’s House of Burgesses called for a day of prayer and fasting to
             show their support. Rather than isolating Massachusetts, the Coercive
             Acts fostered the sense of shared identity created over the previous de-
             cade. After all, if the Crown and Parliament could dissolve Massachu-
             setts’s government, nothing could stop them from doing the same to
             any of her sister colonies. In Massachusetts, patriots created the Provin-
             cial Congress, and, throughout 1774, they seized control of local and
             county governments and courts.29 In New York, citizens elected com-
             mittees to direct the colonies’ response to the Coercive Acts, including a
             Mechanics’ Committee of middling colonists. By early 1774, Commit-
             tees of Correspondence and/or extralegal assemblies were established
             in all of the colonies except Georgia. And throughout the year, they
             followed Massachusetts’s example by seizing the powers of the royal
             governments.
                 Committees of Correspondence agreed to send delegates to a Conti-
             nental Congress to coordinate an intercolonial response. The First Con-
             tinental Congress convened on September 5, 1774. Over the next six
             weeks, elite delegates from every colony but Georgia issued a number
             of documents, including a “Declaration of Rights and Grievances.” This
             document repeated the arguments that colonists had been making since
             1765: colonists retained all the rights of native Britons, including the



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 123


right to be taxed only by their own elected representatives as well as the
right to a trial by jury.
    Most importantly, the Congress issued a document known as the
“Continental Association.” The Association declared that “the present
unhappy situation of our affairs is occasioned by a ruinous system of
colony administration adopted by the British Ministry about the year
1763, evidently calculated for enslaving these Colonies, and, with them,
the British Empire.” The Association recommended “that a committee
be chosen in every county, city, and town . . . whose business it shall be
attentively to observe the conduct of all persons touching this associa-
tion.” These Committees of Inspection would consist largely of common
colonists. They were effectively deputized to police their communities
and instructed to publish the names of anyone who violated the Associa-
tion so they “may be publicly known, and universally condemned as the
enemies of American liberty.” The delegates also agreed to a continental
nonimportation, nonconsumption, and nonexportation agreement and
to “wholly discontinue the slave trade.” In all, the Continental Associa-
tion was perhaps the most radical document of the period. It sought to
unite and direct twelve revolutionary governments, establish economic
and moral policies, and empower common colonists by giving them an
important and unprecedented degree of on-the-ground political power.30
    But not all colonists were patriots. Indeed, many remained faithful
to the king and Parliament, while a good number took a neutral stance.
As the situation intensified throughout 1774 and early 1775, factions
emerged within the resistance movements in many colonies. Elite mer-
chants who traded primarily with Britain, Anglican clergy, and colonists
holding royal offices depended on and received privileges directly from
their relationship with Britain. Initially, they sought to exert a moderat-
ing influence on the resistance committees, but, following the Associa-
tion, a number of these colonists began to worry that the resistance was
too radical and aimed at independence. They, like most colonists in this
period, still expected a peaceful conciliation with Britain and grew in-
creasingly suspicious of the resistance movement.
    However, by the time the Continental Congress met again in May
1775, war had already broken out in Massachusetts. On April 19, 1775,
British regiments set out to seize local militias’ arms and powder stores
in Lexington and Concord. The town militia met them at the Lexington
Green. The British ordered the militia to disperse when someone fired,
setting off a volley from the British. The battle continued all the way to



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
124                                                                                 ch a pter 5


                     the next town, Concord. News of the events at Lexington spread rap-
                     idly throughout the countryside. Militia members, known as minute-
                     men, responded quickly and inflicted significant casualties on the British
                     regiments as they chased them back to Boston. Approximately twenty
                     thousand colonial militiamen laid siege to Boston, effectively trapping
                     the British. In June, the militia set up fortifications on Breed’s Hill over-
                     looking the city. In the misnamed “Battle of Bunker Hill,” the British
                     attempted to dislodge them from the position with a frontal assault, and,
                     despite eventually taking the hill, they suffered severe casualties at the
                     hands of the colonists.
                         While men in Boston fought and died, the Continental Congress
                     struggled to organize a response. The radical Massachusetts delegates—
                     including John Adams, Samuel Adams, and John Hancock—implored
                     the Congress to support the Massachusetts militia, who without supplies
                     were laying siege to Boston. Meanwhile, many delegates from the Middle
                     Colonies—including New York, New Jersey, and Philadelphia—took a
                     more moderate position, calling for renewed attempts at reconciliation.
                     In the South, the Virginia delegation contained radicals such as Richard
                     Henry Lee and Thomas Jefferson, while South Carolina’s delegation in-
The Battle of
Lexington, pub-      cluded moderates like John and Edward Rutledge. The moderates worried
lished by John H.    that supporting the Massachusetts militia would be akin to declaring war.
Daniels & Son, c.
1903. Library of
                         The Congress struck a compromise, agreeing to adopt the Massa-
Congress.            chusetts militia and form a Continental Army, naming Virginia delegate




               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 125


George Washington commander in chief. They also issued a “Declaration
of the Causes of Necessity of Taking Up Arms” to justify the decision. At
the same time, the moderates drafted an “Olive Branch Petition,” which
assured the king that the colonists “most ardently desire[d] the former
Harmony between [the mother country] and these Colonies.” Many
understood that the opportunities for reconciliation were running out.
After Congress had approved the document, Benjamin Franklin wrote to
a friend saying, “The Congress will send one more Petition to the King
which I suppose will be treated as the former was, and therefore will
probably be the last.”31 Congress was in the strange position of attempt-
ing reconciliation while publicly raising an army.
     The petition arrived in England on August 13, 1775, but before it
was delivered, the king issued his own “Proclamation for Suppressing
Rebellion and Sedition.” He believed his subjects in North America were
being “misled by dangerous and ill-designing men,” who were “traitor-
ously preparing, ordering, and levying war against us.” In an October
speech to Parliament, he dismissed the colonists’ petition. The king had
no doubt that the resistance was “manifestly carried on for the purpose
of establishing an independent empire.”32 By the start of 1776, talk of
independence was growing while the prospect of reconciliation dimmed.
     In the opening months of 1776, independence, for the first time, be-
came part of the popular debate. Town meetings throughout the colonies
approved resolutions in support of independence. Yet, with moderates
still hanging on, it would take another seven months before the Conti-
nental Congress officially passed the independence resolution. A small
forty-six-page pamphlet published in Philadelphia and written by a recent
immigrant from England captured the American conversation. Thomas
Paine’s Common Sense argued for independence by denouncing monar-
chy and challenging the logic behind the British Empire, saying, “There
is something absurd, in supposing a continent to be perpetually governed
by an island.”33 His combination of easy language, biblical references,
and fiery rhetoric proved potent, and the pamphlet was quickly pub-
lished throughout the colonies. Arguments over political philosophy and
rumors of battlefield developments filled taverns throughout the colonies.
     George Washington had taken control of the army and after laying
siege to Boston forced the British to retreat to Halifax. In Virginia, the
royal governor, Lord Dunmore, issued a proclamation declaring martial
law and offering freedom to “all indentured servants, Negros, and others”
if they would leave their masters and join the British. Though only about



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
126                                                                         ch a pter 5


             five hundred to a thousand slaves joined Lord Dunmore’s “Ethiopian regi-
             ment,” thousands more flocked to the British later in the war, risking cap-
             ture and punishment for a chance at freedom. Former slaves occasionally
             fought, but primarily served in companies called Black Pioneers as labor-
             ers, skilled workers, and spies. British motives for offering freedom were
             practical rather than humanitarian, but the proclamation was the first
             mass emancipation of enslaved people in American history. Slaves could
             now choose to run and risk their lives for possible freedom with the British
             army or hope that the United States would live up to its ideals of liberty.34
                 Dunmore’s proclamation unnerved white southerners already suspi-
             cious of rising antislavery sentiments in the mother country. Four years
             earlier, English courts dealt a serious blow to slavery in the empire. In
             Somerset v Stewart, James Somerset sued for his freedom, and the court
             not only granted it but also undercut the very legality of slavery on the
             British mainland. Somerset and now Dunmore began to convince some
             slave owners that a new independent nation might offer a surer protec-
             tion for slavery. Indeed, the proclamation laid the groundwork for the
             very unrest that loyal southerners had hoped to avoid. Consequently,
             slaveholders often used violence to prevent their slaves from joining the
             British or rising against them. Virginia enacted regulations to prevent
             slave defection, threatening to ship rebellious slaves to the West Indies
             or execute them. Many masters transported their enslaved people inland,
             away from the coastal temptation to join the British armies, sometimes
             separating families in the process.
                 On May 10, 1776, nearly two months before the Declaration of Inde-
             pendence, the Congress voted on a resolution calling on all colonies that
             had not already established revolutionary governments to do so and to
             wrest control from royal officials.35 The Congress also recommended that
             the colonies should begin preparing new written constitutions. In many
             ways, this was the Congress’s first declaration of independence. A few
             weeks later, on June 7, Richard Henry Lee offered the following resolution:

                Resolved, That these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, Free
                and Independent States, that they are absolved from all allegiance to
                the British Crown, and that all political connexion between them and
                the state of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved.36

                 Delegates went scurrying back to their assemblies for new instruc-
             tions and nearly a month later, on July 2, the resolution finally came to
             a vote. It passed 12–0, with New York, under imminent threat of British
             invasion, abstaining.


       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 127


    The passage of Lee’s resolution was the official legal declaration of
independence, but, between the proposal and vote, a committee had been
named to draft a public declaration in case the resolution passed. Virgin-
ian Thomas Jefferson drafted the document, with edits being made by
his fellow committee members John Adams and Benjamin Franklin, and
then again by the Congress as a whole. The famous preamble went be-
yond the arguments about the rights of British subjects under the British
Constitution, instead referring to “natural law”:

   We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal,
   that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights,
   that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. That
   to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving
   their just powers from the consent of the governed, That whenever any
   Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of
   the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government.37

    The majority of the document outlined a list of specific grievances
that the colonists had with British attempts to reform imperial admin-
istration during the 1760s and 1770s. An early draft blamed the British
for the transatlantic slave trade and even for discouraging attempts by
the colonists to promote abolition. Delegates from South Carolina and




                                                          The Declaration of Independence.
                                                          National Archives and Records
                                                          Administration.


         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
128                                                                          ch a pter 5


             Georgia as well as those from northern states who profited from the trade
             all opposed this language, and it was removed.38
                 Neither the grievances nor the rhetoric of the preamble were new.
             Instead, they were the culmination of both a decade of popular resistance
             to imperial reform and decades more of long-term developments that saw
             both sides develop incompatible understandings of the British Empire
             and the colonies’ place within it. The Congress approved the document
             on July 4, 1776. However, it was one thing to declare independence; it
             was quite another to win it on the battlefield.


             V. The War for Independence
             The war began at Lexington and Concord, more than a year before Con-
             gress declared independence. In 1775, the British believed that the mere
             threat of war and a few minor incursions to seize supplies would be enough
             to cow the colonial rebellion. Those minor incursions, however, turned into
             a full-out military conflict. Despite an early American victory at Boston, the
             new states faced the daunting task of taking on the world’s largest military.
                 In the summer of 1776, the British forces that had abandoned Boston
             arrived at New York. The largest expeditionary force in British history,
             including tens of thousands of German mercenaries known as Hessians,
             followed soon after. New York was the perfect location to launch expe-
             ditions aimed at seizing control of the Hudson River and isolating New
             England from the rest of the continent. Also, New York contained many
             loyalists, particularly among its merchant and Anglican communities. In
             October, the British finally launched an attack on Brooklyn and Manhat-
             tan. The Continental Army took severe losses before retreating through
             New Jersey.39 With the onset of winter, Washington needed something
             to lift morale and encourage reenlistment. Therefore, he launched a suc-
             cessful surprise attack on the Hessian camp at Trenton on Christmas Day
             by ferrying the few thousand men he had left across the Delaware River
             under the cover of night. The victory won the Continental Army much-
             needed supplies and a morale boost following the disaster at New York.40
                 An even greater success followed in upstate New York. In 1777, Brit-
             ish general John Burgoyne led an army from Canada to secure the Hud-
             son River. In upstate New York, he was to meet up with a detachment of
             General William Howe’s forces marching north from Manhattan. How-
             ever, Howe abandoned the plan without telling Burgoyne and instead
             sailed to Philadelphia to capture the new nation’s capital. The Continen-
             tal Army defeated Burgoyne’s men at Saratoga, New York.41 This victory

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 129


proved a major turning point in the war. Benjamin Franklin had been in
Paris trying to secure a treaty of alliance with the French. However, the
French were reluctant to back what seemed like an unlikely cause. News
of the victory at Saratoga convinced the French that the cause might not
have been as unlikely as they had thought. A Treaty of Amity and Com-
merce was signed on February 6, 1778. The treaty effectively turned a
colonial rebellion into a global war as fighting between the British and
French soon broke out in Europe and India.42
    Howe had taken Philadelphia in 1777 but returned to New York once
winter ended. He slowly realized that European military tactics would
not work in North America. In Europe, armies fought head-on battles
in attempt to seize major cities. However, in 1777, the British had held
Philadelphia and New York and yet still weakened their position. Mean-
while, Washington realized after New York that the largely untrained
Continental Army could not win head-on battles with the professional
British army. So he developed his own logic of warfare that involved
smaller, more frequent skirmishes and avoided major engagements that
would risk his entire army. As long as he kept the army intact, the war
would continue, no matter how many cities the British captured.
    In 1778, the British shifted their attentions to the South, where they
believed they enjoyed more popular support. Campaigns from Virginia to
South Carolina and Georgia captured major cities, but the British simply
did not have the manpower to retain military control. And upon their
departures, severe fighting ensued between local patriots and loyalists,




In this 1782 cartoon, the British lion faces a spaniel (Spain), a rooster (France), a rattlesnake (America), and
a pug dog (Netherlands). Though the caption predicts Britain’s success, it illustrates that Britain faced ­
challenges—and therefore drains on their military and treasury—from more than just the American ­rebels. J.
Barrow, The British Lion Engaging Four Powers, 1782. National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, London.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
130                                                                                        ch a pter 5


                      often pitting family members against one another. The War in the South
                      was truly a civil war.43
                          By 1781, the British were also fighting France, Spain, and Holland.
                      The British public’s support for the costly war in North America was
                      quickly waning. The Americans took advantage of the British southern
                      strategy with significant aid from the French army and navy. In October,
                      Washington marched his troops from New York to Virginia in an effort
                      to trap the British southern army under the command of General Charles
                      Cornwallis. Cornwallis had dug his men in at Yorktown awaiting sup-
                      plies and reinforcements from New York. However, the Continental and
                      French armies arrived first, quickly followed by a French navy contin-
                      gent, encircling Cornwallis’s forces and, after laying siege to the city,
                      forcing his surrender. The capture of another army left the British with-
                      out a new strategy and without public support to continue the war. Peace
                      negotiations took place in France, and the war came to an official end on
                      September 3, 1783.44
                          Americans celebrated their victory, but it came at great cost. Soldiers
                      suffered through brutal winters with inadequate resources. During the




Lord Cornwallis’s surrender signaled the victory of the American revolutionaries over what they considered
to be the despotic rule of Britain. This moment would live on in American memory as a pivotal one in the
nation’s origin story, prompting the U.S. government to commission artist John Trumbull to create this
painting of the event in 1817. John Trumbull, Surrender of Lord Cornwallis, 1820. Wikimedia.

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 131


single winter at Valley Forge in 1777–1778, over 2,500 Americans died
from disease and exposure. Life was not easy on the home front either.
Women on both sides of the conflict were frequently left alone to care
for their households. In addition to their existing duties, women took on
roles usually assigned to men on farms and in shops and taverns. Abigail
Adams addressed the difficulties she encountered while “minding family
affairs” on their farm in Braintree, Massachusetts. Abigail managed the
planting and harvesting of crops, in the midst of severe labor shortages
and inflation, while dealing with several tenants on the Adams property,
raising her children, and making clothing and other household goods. In
order to support the family economically during John’s frequent absences
and the uncertainties of war, Abigail also invested in several speculative
schemes and sold imported goods.45
    While Abigail remained safely out of the fray, other women were
not so fortunate. The Revolution was not only fought on distant battle-
fields. It was fought on women’s very doorsteps, in the fields next to their
homes. There was no way for women to avoid the conflict or the disrup-
tions and devastations it caused. As the leader of the state militia during
the Revolution, Mary Silliman’s husband, Gold, was absent from their
home for much of the conflict. On the morning of July 7, 1779, when
a British fleet attacked nearby Fairfield, Connecticut, it was Mary who
calmly evacuated her household, including her children and servants, to
North Stratford. When Gold was captured by loyalists and held prisoner,




American soldiers came from a variety of backgrounds and had numerous reasons for fighting with the
American army. Jean-Baptiste-Antoine DeVerger, a French sublieutenant at the Battle of Yorktown, painted
this watercolor soon after that battle and chose to depict four men in military dress: an African American
soldier from the 2nd Rhode Island Regiment, a man in the homespun of the militia, another wearing the
common “hunting shirt” of the frontier, and the French soldier on the end. Jean-Baptiste-Antoine DeVerger,
American Soldiers at the Siege of Yorktown, 1781. Wikimedia.


          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
132                                                                                          ch a pter 5


                       Mary, six months pregnant with their second child, wrote letters to try to
                       secure his release. When such appeals were ineffectual, Mary spearheaded
                       an effort, along with Connecticut Governor, John Trumbull, to capture a
                       prominent Tory leader to exchange for her husband’s freedom.46
                           Slaves and free black Americans also impacted (and were impacted
                       by) the Revolution. The British were the first to recruit black (or
                       “­Ethiopian”) regiments, as early as Dunmore’s Proclamation of 1775 in
                       Virginia, which promised freedom to any slaves who would escape their
                       masters and join the British cause. At first, Washington, a slaveholder
                       himself, resisted allowing black men to join the Continental Army, but he
                       eventually relented. In 1775, Peter Salem’s master freed him to fight with
                       the militia. Salem faced British Regulars in the battles at Lexington and
                       Bunker Hill, where he fought valiantly with around three dozen other
                       black Americans. Salem not only contributed to the cause, he earned the
                       ability to determine his own life after his enlistment ended. Salem was
                       not alone, but many more slaves seized on the tumult of war to run away




Another John Trumbull piece commissioned for the Capitol in 1817, this painting depicts what would
be remembered as the moment the new United States became a republic. On December 23, 1783, George
Washington, widely considered the hero of the Revolution, resigned his position as the most powerful man
in the former thirteen colonies. Giving up his role as commander-in-chief of the army insured that civilian
rule would define the new nation, and that a republic would be set in place rather than a dictatorship. John
Trumbull, General George Washington Resigning His Commission, c. 1817–1824. From the Architect of
the Capitol.

                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 133


and secure their own freedom directly. Historians estimate that between
thirty thousand and one hundred thousand slaves deserted their masters
during the war.47
    Men and women together struggled through years of war and hard-
ship. For patriots (and those who remained neutral), victory brought new
political, social, and economic opportunities, but it also brought new
uncertainties. The war decimated entire communities, particularly in the
South. Thousands of women throughout the nation had been widowed.
The American economy, weighed down by war debt and depreciated cur-
rencies, would have to be rebuilt following the war. State constitutions
had created governments, but now men would have to figure out how to
govern. The opportunities created by the Revolution had come at great
cost, in both lives and fortune, and it was left to the survivors to seize
those opportunities and help forge and define the new nation-state.


VI. The Consequences of the American Revolution
Like the earlier distinction between “origins” and “causes,” the Revolu-
tion also had short- and long-term consequences. Perhaps the most impor-
tant immediate consequence of declaring independence was the creation
of state constitutions in 1776 and 1777. The Revolution also unleashed
powerful political, social, and economic forces that would transform the
new nation’s politics and society, including increased participation in pol-
itics and governance, the legal institutionalization of religious toleration,
and the growth and diffusion of the population, particularly westward.
The Revolution affected Native Americans by opening up western settle-
ment and creating governments hostile to their territorial claims. Even
more broadly, the Revolution ended the mercantilist economy, opening
new opportunities in trade and manufacturing.
    The new states drafted written constitutions, which, at the time, was
an important innovation from the traditionally unwritten British Constitu-
tion. These new state constitutions were based on the idea of “popular sov-
ereignty,” that is, that the power and authority of the government derived
from the people.48 Most created weak governors and strong legislatures
with more regular elections and moderately increased the size of the elec-
torate. A number of states followed the example of Virginia and included a
declaration or “bill” of rights in their constitution designed to protect the
rights of individuals and circumscribe the prerogative of the government.
Pennsylvania’s first state constitution was the most radical and democratic.
They created a unicameral legislature and an Executive Council but no

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
134                                                                         ch a pter 5


             genuine executive. All free men could vote, including those who did not
             own property. Massachusetts’s constitution, passed in 1780, was less dem-
             ocratic in structure but underwent a more popular process of ratification.
             In the fall of 1779, each town sent delegates—312 in all—to a constitu-
             tional convention in Cambridge. Town meetings debated the constitution
             draft and offered suggestions. Anticipating the later federal constitution,
             Massachusetts established a three-branch government based on checks and
             balances between the branches. Independence came in 1776, and so did an
             unprecedented period of constitution making and state building.
                 The Continental Congress ratified the Articles of Confederation in
             1781. The articles allowed each state one vote in the Continental Con-
             gress. But the articles are perhaps most notable for what they did not
             allow. Congress was given no power to levy or collect taxes, regulate for-
             eign or interstate commerce, or establish a federal judiciary. These short-
             comings rendered the postwar Congress weak and largely ineffectual.
                 Political and social life changed drastically after independence. Politi-
             cal participation grew as more people gained the right to vote, leading to
             greater importance being placed on representation within government.49
             In addition, more common citizens (or “new men”) played increasingly
             important roles in local and state governance. Hierarchy within the states
             underwent significant changes. Society became less deferential and more
             egalitarian, less aristocratic and more meritocratic.
                 The Revolution’s most important long-term economic consequence
             was the end of mercantilism. The British Empire had imposed various re-
             strictions on the colonial economies including limiting trade, settlement,
             and manufacturing. The Revolution opened new markets and new trade
             relationships. The Americans’ victory also opened the western territo-
             ries for invasion and settlement, which created new domestic markets.
             Americans began to create their own manufactures, no longer content to
             rely on those in Britain.
                 Despite these important changes, the American Revolution had its
             limits. Following their unprecedented expansion into political affairs
             during the imperial resistance, women also served the patriot cause dur-
             ing the war. However, the Revolution did not result in civic equality for
             women. Instead, during the immediate postwar period, women became
             incorporated into the polity to some degree as “republican mothers.”
             Republican societies required virtuous citizens, and it became mothers’
             responsibility to raise and educate future citizens. This opened opportu-
             nity for women regarding education, but they still remained largely on
             the peripheries of the new American polity.

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 135




                                                       In the thirteen colonies, boycotting women
                                                       were seen as patriots. In British prints such as
                                                       this, they were mocked as as immoral harlots
                                                       sticking their noses in the business of men.
                                                       Philip Dawe, A Society of Patriotic Ladies
                                                       at Edenton in North Carolina, March 1775.
                                                       Metropolitan Museum of Art.


    Approximately sixty thousand loyalists ended up leaving America be-
cause of the Revolution. Loyalists came from all ranks of American soci-
ety, and many lived the rest of their lives in exile from their homeland. A
clause in the Treaty of Paris was supposed to protect their property and
require the Americans to compensate Loyalists who had lost property
during the war because of their allegiance. The Americans, however, re-
neged on this promise and, throughout the 1780s, states continued seizing
property held by Loyalists. Some colonists went to England, where they
were strangers and outsiders in what they had thought of as their mother
country. Many more, however, settled on the peripheries of the British
Empire throughout the world, especially Nova Scotia, New Brunswick,
and Quebec. The Loyalists had come out on the losing side of a Revolu-
tion, and many lost everything they had and were forced to create new
lives far from the land of their birth.50
    In 1783, thousands of Loyalist former slaves fled with the British army.
They hoped that the British government would uphold the promise of free-
dom and help them establish new homes elsewhere in the Empire. The Treaty
of Paris, which ended the war, demanded that British troops leave runaway
slaves behind, but the British military commanders upheld earlier promises

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
136                                                                                 ch a pter 5




Joseph Brandt as painted by George Romney.
Brandt was a Mohawk leader who led Mohawk
and British forces in western New York. Wikimedia.


                     and evacuated thousands of freedmen, transporting them to Canada, the
                     Caribbean, or Great Britain. They would eventually play a role in settling
                     Nova Scotia, and through the subsequent efforts of David George, a black
                     loyalist and Baptist preacher, some settled in Sierra Leone in Africa. Black
                     loyalists, however, continued to face social and economic marginalization,
                     including restrictions on land ownership within the British Empire.51
                         The fight for liberty led some Americans to manumit their slaves,
                     and most of the new northern states soon passed gradual emancipation
                     laws. Some manumissions also occurred in the Upper South, but in the
                     Lower South, some masters revoked their offers of freedom for service,
                     and other freedmen were forced back into bondage. The Revolution’s
                     rhetoric of equality created a “revolutionary generation” of slaves and
                     free black Americans that would eventually encourage the antislavery
                     movement. Slave revolts began to incorporate claims for freedom based

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 137


on revolutionary ideals. In the long term, the Revolution failed to recon-
cile slavery with these new egalitarian republican societies, a tension that
eventually boiled over in the 1830s and 1840s and effectively tore the
nation in two in the 1850s and 1860s.52
    Native Americans, too, participated in and were affected by the Rev-
olution. Many Native American groups, such as the Shawnee, Creek,
Cherokee, and Iroquois, had sided with the British. They had hoped for
a British victory that would continue to restrain the land-hungry colonial
settlers from moving west beyond the Appalachian Mountains. Unfor-
tunately, the Americans’ victory and Native Americans’ support for the
British created a pretense for justifying rapid and often brutal expansion
into the western territories. Native American peoples would continue to
be displaced and pushed farther west throughout the nineteenth century.
Ultimately, American independence marked the beginning of the end of
what had remained of Native American independence.


VII. Conclusion
The American Revolution freed colonists from British rule and offered
the first blow in what historians have called “the age of democratic rev-
olutions.” The American Revolution was a global event.53 Revolutions
followed in France, then Haiti, and then South America. The American
Revolution meanwhile wrought significant changes to the British Empire.
Many British historians even use the Revolution as a dividing point be-
tween a “first British Empire” and a “second British Empire.” At home,
however, the Revolution created a new nation-state, the United States
of America. By September 1783, independence had been won. What the
new nation would look like, however, was still very much up for grabs.
In the 1780s, Americans would shape and then reshape that nation-state,
first with the Articles of Confederation, ratified in 1781, and then with
the Constitution in 1787 and 1788.
    Historians have long argued over the causes and character of the
American Revolution. Was the Revolution caused by British imperial
policy or by internal tensions within the colonies? Were colonists primar-
ily motivated by constitutional principles, ideals of equality, or economic
self-interest? Was the Revolution radical or conservative? But such ques-
tions are hardly limited to historians. From Abraham Lincoln’s use of the
Declaration of Independence in the Gettysburg Address to twenty-first-
century Tea Party members wearing knee breeches, the Revolution has
remained at the center of American political culture. Indeed, how one

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
138                                                                             ch a pter 5


             understands the Revolution often dictates how one defines what it means
             to be American.
                 The Revolution was not won by a few founding fathers. Men and
             women of all ranks contributed to the colonies’ most improbable vic-
             tory, from the commoners who protested the Stamp Act to the women
             who helped organize boycotts against the Townshend duties; from the
             men, black and white, who fought in the army to the women who con-
             tributed to its support. The Revolution, however, did not aim to end all
             social and civic inequalities in the new nation, and, in the case of Native
             Americans, it created new inequalities. But over time, the Revolution’s
             rhetoric of equality, as encapsulated in the Declaration of Independence,
             helped highlight some of those inequalities and became a shared aspira-
             tion for future social and political movements, including, among others,
             the abolitionist and women’s rights movements of the nineteenth century,
             the suffragist and civil rights movements of the twentieth century, and the
             gay rights movement of the twenty-first century.


             VIII. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Michael Hattem, with content contributions by James
             Ambuske, Alexander Burns, Joshua Beatty, Christina Carrick, Christopher Con-
             solino, Michael Hattem, Timothy C. Hemmis, Joseph Moore, Emily Romeo, and
             Christopher Sparshott.
                 Recommended citation: James Ambuske et al., “The American Revolution,”
             Michael Hattem, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright
             (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

             Not e s to C h a p t e r 5
                  1. Benjamin Rush to Ebenezer Hazard, October 22, 1768, in L. H. Butter-
             field, ed., Letters of Benjamin Rush, 2 vols. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
             Press, 1951), vol. 1, 68.
                  2. Jack P. Greene, The Constitutional Origins of the American Revolution
             (Cambridge, UK: New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
                  3. James Otis, The Rights of the Colonies Asserted and Proved (Boston: Edes
             and Gill, 1764), 52, 38.
                  4. Greene, Constitutional Origins of the American Revolution, 118.
                  5. Bernard Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution
             (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1967).
                  6. Jack P. Greene, Pursuits of Happiness: The Social Development of Early
             Modern British Colonies and the Formation of American Culture (Chapel Hill:
             University of North Carolina Press, 1988), 170–171. Also see John Murrin,
             “Anglicizing an American Colony: The Transformation of Provincial Massachu-
             setts,” PhD diss., Yale University, 1966.


       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 139


     7. Daniel Dulany, Considerations on the Propriety of Imposing Taxes in the
British Colonies, for the Purpose of Raising a Revenue, by Act of Parliament. The
Second Edition (Annapolis, MD: Jonas Green, 1765), 34. For a 1766 London
reprint, see https://​archive​.org/​details/​cihm​_20394, accessed April 24, 2018.
     8. Newport Mercury, June 24, 1765. This version was also reprinted in
newspapers in New York, Boston, Philadelphia, and Maryland.
     9. Proceedings of the Congress at New-York (Annapolis, MD: Jonas Green,
1766).
     10. Dulany, Considerations on the Propriety of Imposing Taxes in the Brit-
ish Colonies, 8.
     11. “The Colonist’s Advocate: III, 11 January 1770,” Founders Online, Na-
tional Archives. http://​founders​.archives​.gov/​documents/​Franklin/​01​-17​-02​-00​09,
last modified June 29, 2017.
     12. George Canning, A Letter to the Right Honourable Wills Earl of Hills-
borough, on the Connection Between Great Britain and Her American Colonies
(London: T. Becket, 1768), 9.
     13. “New York, October 31, 1765,” New-York Gazette, or Weekly Mer-
cury, November 7, 1765.
     14. “Resolution of Non-Importation made by the Citizens of Philadelphia,”
October 25, 1765, mss., Historical Society of Pennsylvania. http://​digitalhistory​
.hsp ​ . org/ ​ p afrm/ ​ d oc/ ​ r esolution ​ - non ​ - importation ​ - made ​ - citizens ​ - philadelphia​
-october​-25​-1765. For the published notice of the resolution, see “Philadelphia,
November 7, 1765,” broadside, “Pennsylvania Stamp Act and Non-Importation
Resolutions Collection,” American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, PA.
     15. “The Petition of the London Merchants to the House of Commons,”
in Prologue to Revolution: Sources and Documents on the Stamp Act Crisis,
1764–1766, ed. Edmund S. Morgan (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1959), 130–131.
     16. Governor Francis Bernard to Lord Halifax, August 15, 1765, in ibid., 107.
     17. For Hutchinson’s own account of the events, see Thomas Hutchinson to
Richard Jackson, August 30, 1765, in The Correspondence of Thomas Hutchin-
son, Volume 1: 1740–1766, ed. John W. Tyler (Boston: Colonial Society of Mas-
sachusetts, 2014), 291–294.
     18. Documents Relative to the Colonial History of the State of New-York,
procured in Holland, England, and France, 13 vols., ed. Edmund O’Callaghan
(Albany, NY: Weed, Parsons, 1856), vol. 7, 770. https://​pbs​.twimg​.com/​media
/​Btm5M84IMAA4MCY​.png:​large, accessed April 24, 2018.
     19. The Declaratory Act,” The Avalon Project: Documents in Law, History,
and Diplomacy. http://​avalon​.law​.yale​.edu/​18th​_century/​declaratory​_act​_1766​
.asp, accessed April 24, 2018.
     20. “Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania, to the Inhabitants of the British
Colonies. Letter II,” Pennsylvania Gazette, December 10, 1767.
     21. “Address to the Ladies,” Boston Post-Boy, November 16, 1767; Boston
Evening-Post, February 12, 1770. Many female contributions to political com-
mentary took the form of poems and drama, as in the poetry of Hannah Griffitts
and satirical plays by Mercy Otis Warren.

             © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                      Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
140                                                                                ch a pter 5


                  22. Carol Berkin, Revolutionary Mothers: Women in the Struggle for Amer-
             ica’s Independence (New York: Knopf, 2005), 17–18.
                  23. New York Gazette, or Weekly Post-Boy, June 18, July 9, 16, 1770.
                  24. Pennsylvania Chronicle, September 27, 1773. For an example of how
             fast news and propaganda was spreading throughout the colonies, this piece was
             reprinted in Massachusetts Gazette, October 4, 1773; New-Hampshire Gazette,
             and Historical Chronicle, October 15, 1773; and Virginia Gazette, October 21,
             1773.
                  25. Massachusetts Gazette, and Boston Post-Boy, November 29, 1773.
                  26. Boston Gazette, December 20, 1773.
                  27. Virginia Gazette, November 3, 1774; Cynthia A. Kierner, “The Edenton
             Ladies: Women, Tea, and Politics in Revolutionary North Carolina,” in North
             Carolina Women: Their Lives and Times, ed. Michele Gillespie and Sally G. Mc-
             Millen (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2014), 12–33.
                  28. Ellen Hartigan-O’Connor, The Ties That Buy: Women and Commerce
             in Revolutionary America (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009),
             178–184.
                  29. Ray Raphael, The First American Revolution: Before Lexington and
             Concord (New York: New Press, 2002), 59–168.
                  30. American Archives: Fourth Series Containing a Documentary History of
             the English Colonies in North America, ed. Peter Force (Washington, D.C.: Clarke
             and Force, 1837), vol. 1, 913–916. https://​archive​.org/​stream/​AmericanArchives​
             -FourthSeriesVolume1​-ContainingADocumentaryHistory/​AaSeries4VolumeI​
             #page/​n455/​mode/​2up, accessed April 24, 2018.
                  31. “From Benjamin Franklin to Jonathan Shipley, 7 July 1775,” Founders
             Online, National Archives. http://​founders​.archives​.gov/​documents/​Franklin/​01​
             -22​-02​-0057, last modified June 29, 2017.
                  32. Gt. Brit. Soveriengs, Etc., “His Majesty’s Most Gracious Speech to Both
             Houses of Parliament, on Friday, October 27, 1775 . . . New York? 1775].”
             https://​www​.loc​.gov/​item/​rbpe​.10803800/, accessed April 24, 2018.
                  33. Thomas Paine, Common Sense (Philadelphia: W. T. and Bradford, 1776).
             https://​www​.gutenberg​.org/​files/​147/​147​-h/​147​-h​.htm, accessed April 24, 2018.
                  34. Pennsylvania Evening Post, September 21, 1776.
                  35. Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789, 34 vols. (Washington,
             DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1904–1937), vol. 4, 342. http://​memory​
             .loc​.gov/​cgi​-bin/​query/​r​?ammem/​hlaw:​@field​(DOCID​+​@lit​(jc004109.
                  36. “Report & the Resolution for Independancy Agreed to July 2d. 1776,”
             Papers of the Continental Congress, No. 23, folio 17, National Archives, Wash-
             ington, DC. http://​www​.archives​.gov/​exhibits/​american​_originals/​declarat​.html.
                  37. Journals of the Continental Congress 5: 510–516.
                  38. For more on the process of writing the Declaration of Independence,
             see Pauline Maier, American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence
             (New York: Knopf, 1997).
                  39. Barnet Schecter, The Battle for New York: The City at the Heart of the
             American Revolution (New York: Walker, 2002).



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he A me ri c a n R e v o l u tio n 141


    40. David Hackett Fischer, Washington’s Crossing (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2004).
    41. Richard M. Ketchum, Saratoga: Turning Point of America’s Revolution-
ary War (New York: Holt, 1997).
    42. For more on Franklin’s diplomacy in France, see Stacy Schiff, A Great
Improvisation: Franklin, France, and the Birth of America (New York: Thorn-
dike Press, 2005).
    43. David K. Wilson, The Southern Strategy: Britain’s Conquest of South
Carolina and Georgia, 1775–1780 (Columbia: University of South Carolina
Press, 2005).
    44. Richard M. Ketchum, Victory at Yorktown: The Campaign That Won
the Revolution (New York: Holt, 2004).
    45. Woody Holton, Abigail Adams (New York: Free Press, 2009), 208–217.
    46. Joy Day Buel and Richard Buel, The Way of Duty: A Woman and Her
Family in Revolutionary America (New York: Norton, 1995), 145–170.
    47. For discussion of these numerical estimates, see Gary Nash’s introduc-
tion to Benjamin Quarles, The Negro in the American Revolution (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina, Press, 1996), xxiii.
    48. Willi Paul Adams, The First American Constitutions: Republican Ideol-
ogy and the Making of the State Constitutions in the Revolutionary Era (Lan-
ham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2001), 126–146.
    49. Gordon S. Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1969).
    50. Maya Jasanoff, Liberty’s Exiles: American Loyalists in the Revolutionary
World (New York: Knopf, 2011).
    51. Alan Gilbert, Black Patriots and Loyalists: Fighting for Emancipation in
the War of Independence (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).
    52. Ira Berlin, Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery
in North America (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), 217–289.
    53. For a summary of the global aspects of the Revolution, see Ted Brack-
emyre, “The American Revolution: A Very European Ordeal,” U.S. History
Scene, http://​ushistoryscene​.com/​article/​am​-rev​-european​-ordeal, accessed April
24, 2018.

R e c om m e n d e d R e a di n g
Bailyn, Bernard. The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. Cam-
    bridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1967.
Berkin, Carol. Revolutionary Mothers: Women in the Struggle for America’s In-
    dependence. New York: Knopf, 20056.
Breen, T. H. The Marketplace of Revolution: How Consumer Politics Shaped
    American Independence. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Carp, Benjamin L. Rebels Rising: Cities and the American Revolution. New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Duvall, Kathleen. Independence Lost: Lives on the Edge of the American Revolu-
    tion. New York: Random House, 2015.



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
142                                                                            ch a pter 5


             Egerton, Douglas R. Death or Liberty: African Americans and Revolutionary
                 America. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
             Eustace, Nicole. Passion Is the Gale: Emotion, Power, and the Coming of the
                 American Revolution. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2008.
             Fliegelman, Jay. Prodigals and Pilgrims: The American Revolution Against Patri-
                 archal Authority 1750–1800. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
             Gould, Eliga. Among the Powers of the Earth: The American Revolution and
                 the Making of a New World Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
                 Press, 2012.
             Greene, Jack P. The Constitutional Origins of the American Revolution. New
                 York: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
             Holton, Woody. Forced Founders: Indians, Debtors, Slaves, and the Making of
                 the American Revolution in Virginia. Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
                 lina Press, 1999.
             Jasanoff, Maya. Liberty’s Exiles: American Loyalists in the Revolutionary World.
                 New York: Knopf, 2011.
             Kamensky, Jane. A Revolution in Color: The World of John Singleton Copley.
                 New York: Norton, 2016.
             Kerber, Linda K. Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary
                 America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1980.
             Knott, Sarah. Sensibility and the American Revolution. Chapel Hill: University of
                 North Carolina Press, 2009.
             Landers, Jane G. Atlantic Creoles in the Age of Revolutions. Cambridge, MA:
                 Harvard University Press, 2010.
             Maier, Pauline. American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence.
                 New York: Knopf, 1997.
             ———. From Resistance to Revolution: Colonial Radicals and the Development
                 of American Opposition to Britain, 1765–1776. New York: Vintage Books,
                 1974.
             Nash, Gary B. The Unknown American Revolution: The Unruly Birth of Democ-
                 racy and the Struggle to Create America. New York: Viking, 2005.
             Norton, Mary Beth. Liberty’s Daughters: The Revolutionary Experience of
                 American Women, 1750–1800. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1980.
             O’Shaughnessy, Andrew Jackson. The Men Who Lost America: British Leader-
                 ship, the American Revolution, and the Fate of the Empire. New Haven, CT:
                 Yale University Press, 2013.
             Schiff, Stacy. A Great Improvisation: Franklin, France, and the Birth of America.
                 New York: Thorndike Press, 2005.
             Waldstreicher, David. Slavery’s Constitution: From Revolution to Ratification.
                 New York: Hill and Wang, 2009.
             Wood, Gordon S. The Radicalism of the American Revolution. New York: Vin-
                 tage Books, 1992.
             Young, Alfred F., and Gregory Nobles. Whose American Revolution Was It? His-
                 torians Interpret the Founding. New York: New York University Press, 2011.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
6
A New Nation

I. Introduction
On July 4, 1788, Philadelphians turned out for a “grand federal pro-           “The Federal
                                                                               Pillars,” from the
cession” in honor of the new national constitution. Workers in vari-           Massachusetts
ous trades and professions demonstrated. Blacksmiths carted around a           Centinel, August
                                                                               2, 1789. Library
working forge, on which they symbolically beat swords into farm tools.
                                                                               of Congress.
Potters proudly carried a sign paraphrasing from the Bible, “The potter
hath power over his clay,” linking God’s power with an artisan’s work
and a citizen’s control over the country. Christian clergymen meanwhile
marched arm-in-arm with Jewish rabbis. The grand procession repre-
sented what many Americans hoped the United States would become: a
diverse but cohesive, prosperous nation.1
    Over the next few years, Americans would celebrate more of these pa-
triotic holidays. In April 1789, for example, thousands gathered in New
York to see George Washington take the presidential oath of office. That
November, Washington called his fellow citizens to celebrate with a day
of thanksgiving, particularly for “the peaceable and rational manner” in
which the government had been established.2

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
144                                                                                         ch a pter 6


                          But the new nation was never as cohesive as its champions had hoped.
                      Although the officials of the new federal government—and the people
                      who supported it—placed great emphasis on unity and cooperation, the
                      country was often anything but unified. The Constitution itself had been
                      a controversial document adopted to strengthen the government so that
                      it could withstand internal conflicts. Whatever the later celebrations, the
                      new nation had looked to the future with uncertainty. Less than two
                      years before the national celebrations of 1788 and 1789, the United
                      States had faced the threat of collapse.


                      II. Shays’ Rebellion
                      In 1786 and 1787, a few years after the Revolution ended, thousands of
                      farmers in western Massachusetts were struggling under a heavy burden
                      of debt. Their problems were made worse by weak local and national
                      economies. Many political leaders saw both the debt and the struggling
                      economy as a consequence of the Articles of Confederation, which pro-
                      vided the federal government with no way to raise revenue and did little




Daniel Shays became a divisive figure, to some a violent rebel seeking to upend the new American
government, to others an upholder of the true revolutionary virtues Shays and others fought for. This
contemporary depiction of Shays and his accomplice Job Shattuck portrays them in the latter light as rising
“illustrious from the Jail.” Unidentified artist, Daniel Shays and Job Shattuck, 1787. Wikimedia.

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  145


to create a cohesive nation out of the various states. The farmers wanted
the Massachusetts government to protect them from their creditors, but
the state supported the lenders instead. As creditors threatened to fore-
close on their property, many of these farmers, including Revolutionary
War veterans, took up arms.
    Led by a fellow veteran named Daniel Shays, these armed men, the
“Shaysites,” resorted to tactics like the patriots had used before the
Revolution, forming blockades around courthouses to keep judges from
issuing foreclosure orders. These protesters saw their cause and their
methods as an extension of the “Spirit of 1776”; they were protecting
their rights and demanding redress for the people’s grievances.
    Governor James Bowdoin, however, saw the Shaysites as rebels who
wanted to rule the government through mob violence. He called up thou-
sands of militiamen to disperse them. A former Revolutionary general, Ben-
jamin Lincoln, led the state force, insisting that Massachusetts must prevent
“a state of anarchy, confusion and slavery.”3 In January 1787, Lincoln’s
militia arrested more than one thousand Shaysites and reopened the courts.
    Daniel Shays and other leaders were indicted for treason, and several
were sentenced to death, but eventually Shays and most of his follow-
ers received pardons. Their protest, which became known as Shays’ Re-
bellion, generated intense national debate. While some Americans, like
Thomas Jefferson, thought “a little rebellion now and then” helped keep
the country free, others feared the nation was sliding toward anarchy and
complained that the states could not maintain control. For nationalists
like James Madison of Virginia, Shays’ Rebellion was a prime example of
why the country needed a strong central government. “Liberty,” Madi-
son warned, “may be endangered by the abuses of liberty as well as the
abuses of power.”4


III. The Constitutional Convention
The uprising in Massachusetts convinced leaders around the country to
act. After years of goading by James Madison and other nationalists,
delegates from twelve of the thirteen states met at the Pennsylvania state
house in Philadelphia in the summer of 1787. Only Rhode Island de-
clined to send a representative. The delegates arrived at the convention
with instructions to revise the Articles of Confederation.
    The biggest problem the convention needed to solve was the federal
government’s inability to levy taxes. That weakness meant that the bur-
den of paying back debt from the Revolutionary War fell on the states.

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
146                                                                                 ch a pter 6


                     The states, in turn, found themselves beholden to the lenders who had
                     bought up their war bonds. That was part of why Massachusetts had
                     chosen to side with its wealthy bondholders over poor western farmers.5
                         James Madison, however, had no intention of simply revising the Ar-
                     ticles of Confederation. He intended to produce a completely new na-
                     tional constitution. In the preceding year, he had completed two extensive
                     research projects—one on the history of government in the United States,
                     the other on the history of republics around the world. He used this re-
                     search as the basis for a proposal he brought with him to Philadelphia. It
                     came to be called the Virginia Plan, named after Madison’s home state.6
                         The Virginia Plan was daring. Classical learning said that a repub-
James Madison        lican form of government required a small and homogenous state: the
was a central
figure in the re-    Roman republic, or a small country like Denmark, for example. Citizens
configuration of     who were too far apart or too different could not govern themselves suc-
the national
government.
                     cessfully. Conventional wisdom said the United States needed to have a
Madison’s Vir-       very weak central government, which should simply represent the states
ginia Plan was a
                     on certain matters they had in common. Otherwise, power should stay at
guiding document
in the formation     the state or local level. But Madison’s research had led him in a different
of a new govern-     direction. He believed it was possible to create “an extended republic”
ment under the
Constitution.        encompassing a diversity of people, climates, and customs.
John Vanderlyn,          The Virginia Plan, therefore, proposed that the United States should
Portrait of James
Madison, 1816.
                     have a strong federal government. It was to have three branches—­
Wikimedia.           legislative, executive, and judicial—with power to act on any issues of na-




               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  147


tional concern. The legislature, or Congress, would have two houses, in
which every state would be represented according to its population size or
tax base. The national legislature would have veto power over state laws.7
    Other delegates to the convention generally agreed with Madison that
the Articles of Confederation had failed. But they did not agree on what
kind of government should replace them. In particular, they disagreed
about the best method of representation in the new Congress. Represen-
tation was an important issue that influenced a host of other decisions,
including deciding how the national executive branch should work, what
specific powers the federal government should have, and even what to do
about the divisive issue of slavery.
    For more than a decade, each state had enjoyed a single vote in the
Continental Congress. Small states like New Jersey and Delaware wanted
to keep things that way. The Connecticut delegate Roger Sherman, fur-
thermore, argued that members of Congress should be appointed by the
state legislatures. Ordinary voters, Sherman said, lacked information,
were “constantly liable to be misled” and “should have as little to do
as may be” about most national decisions.8 Large states, however, pre-
ferred the Virginia Plan, which would give their citizens far more power
over the legislative branch. James Wilson of Pennsylvania argued that
since the Virginia Plan would vastly increase the powers of the national
government, representation should be drawn as directly as possible from
the public. No government, he warned, “could long subsist without the
confidence of the people.”9
    Ultimately, Roger Sherman suggested a compromise. Congress would
have a lower house, the House of Representatives, in which members
were assigned according to each state’s population, and an upper house,
which became the Senate, in which each state would have one vote. This
proposal, after months of debate, was adopted in a slightly altered form
as the Great Compromise: each state would have two senators, who
could vote independently. In addition to establishing both types of repre-
sentation, this compromise also counted a slave as three fifths of a person
for representation and tax purposes.
    The delegates took even longer to decide on the form of the national
executive branch. Should executive power be in the hands of a committee
or a single person? How should its officeholders be chosen? On June 1,
James Wilson moved that the national executive power reside in a single
person. Coming only four years after the American Revolution, that pro-
posal was extremely contentious; it conjured up images of an elected



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
148                                                                                  ch a pter 6


                      monarchy.10 The delegates also worried about how to protect the execu-
                      tive branch from corruption or undue control. They endlessly debated
                      these questions, and not until early September did they decide the presi-
                      dent would be elected by a special electoral college.
                          In the end, the Constitutional Convention proposed a government
                      unlike any other, combining elements copied from ancient republics and
                      English political tradition but making some limited democratic innova-
                      tions—all while trying to maintain a delicate balance between national and
Delegates to the      state sovereignty. It was a complicated and highly controversial scheme.
Constitutional
Convention as-
sembled, argued,
and finally agreed
                      IV. Ratifying the Constitution
in this room,
styled in the same
                      The convention voted to send its proposed Constitution to Congress,
manner as during      which was then sitting in New York, with a cover letter from George
the Convention.
                      Washington. The plan for adopting the new Constitution, however, re-
Photograph of the
Assembly Room,        quired approval from special state ratification conventions, not just
Independence          Congress. During the ratification process, critics of the Constitution or-
Hall, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. Wi-     ganized to persuade voters in the different states to oppose it.
kimedia. Creative         Importantly, the Constitutional Convention had voted down a pro-
Commons Attri-
bution-Share Alike
                      posal from Virginia’s George Mason, the author of Virginia’s state Dec-
3.0 Unported.         laration of Rights, for a national bill of rights. This omission became a




                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  149


rallying point for opponents of the document. Many of these Anti-Fed-
eralists argued that without such a guarantee of specific rights, American
citizens risked losing their personal liberty to the powerful federal gov-
ernment. The pro-ratification Federalists, on the other hand, argued that
including a bill of rights was not only redundant but dangerous; it could
limit future citizens from adding new rights.11
    Citizens debated the merits of the Constitution in newspaper arti-
cles, letters, sermons, and coffeehouse quarrels across America. Some of
the most famous, and most important, arguments came from Alexander
Hamilton, John Jay, and James Madison in the Federalist Papers, which
were published in various New York newspapers in 1787 and 1788.12
The first crucial vote came at the beginning of 1788 in Massachusetts.
At first, the Anti-Federalists at the Massachusetts ratifying convention
probably had the upper hand, but after weeks of debate, enough del-
egates changed their votes to narrowly approve the Constitution. But
they also approved a number of proposed amendments, which were to
be submitted to the first Congress. This pattern—ratifying the Constitu-
tion but attaching proposed amendments—was followed by other state
conventions.
    The most high-profile convention was held in Richmond, Virginia,
in June 1788, when Federalists like James Madison, Edmund Randolph,
and John Marshall squared off against equally influential Anti-Federalists
like Patrick Henry and George Mason. Virginia was America’s most pop-
ulous state, it had produced some of the country’s highest-profile leaders,
and the success of the new government rested upon its cooperation. After
nearly a month of debate, Virginia voted 89 to 79 in favor of ratification.13
    On July 2, 1788, Congress announced that a majority of states had
ratified the Constitution and that the document was now in effect. Yet
this did not mean the debates were over. North Carolina, New York, and
Rhode Island had not completed their ratification conventions, and Anti-
Federalists still argued that the Constitution would lead to tyranny. The
New York convention would ratify the Constitution by just three votes,
and finally Rhode Island would ratify it by two votes—a full year after
George Washington was inaugurated as president.


V. Rights and Compromises
Although debates continued, Washington’s election as president ce-
mented the Constitution’s authority. By 1793, the term Anti-Federalist
would be essentially meaningless. Yet the debates produced a piece of

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
150                                                                         ch a pter 6


             the C­ onstitution that seems irreplaceable today. Ten amendments were
             added in 1791. Together, they constitute the Bill of Rights. James Madi-
             son, against his original wishes, supported these amendments as an
             act of political compromise and necessity. He had won election to the
             House of Representatives only by promising his Virginia constituents
             such a list of rights.
                 There was much the Bill of Rights did not cover. Women found no
             special protections or guarantee of a voice in government. Many states
             continued to restrict voting only to men who owned significant amounts
             of property. And slavery not only continued to exist; it was condoned
             and protected by the Constitution.
                 Of all the compromises that formed the Constitution, perhaps none
             would be more important than the compromise over the slave trade.
             Americans generally perceived the transatlantic slave trade as more vi-
             olent and immoral than slavery itself. Many ortherners opposed it on
             moral grounds. But they also understood that letting southern states im-
             port more Africans would increase their political power. The Constitu-
             tion counted each black individual as three fifths of a person for purposes
             of representation, so in districts with many slaves, the white voters had
             extra influence. On the other hand, the states of the Upper South also
             welcomed a ban on the Atlantic trade because they already had a sur-
             plus of slaves. Banning importation meant slave owners in Virginia and
             Maryland could get higher prices when they sold their slaves to states like
             South Carolina and Georgia that were dependent on a continued slave
             trade.
                 New England and the Deep South agreed to what was called a “dirty
             compromise” at the Constitutional Convention in 1787. New England-
             ers agreed to include a constitutional provision that protected the foreign
             slave trade for twenty years; in exchange, South Carolina and Georgia
             delegates had agreed to support a constitutional clause that made it eas-
             ier for Congress to pass commercial legislation. As a result, the Atlantic
             slave trade resumed until 1808 when it was outlawed for three reasons.
             First, Britain was also in the process of outlawing the slave trade in 1807,
             and the United States did not want to concede any moral high ground
             to its rival. Second, the Haitian Revolution (1791–1804), a successful
             slave revolt against French colonial rule in the West Indies, had changed
             the stakes in the debate. The image of thousands of armed black revo-
             lutionaries terrified white Americans. Third, the Haitian Revolution had
             ended France’s plans to expand its presence in the Americas, so in 1803,



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  151


the United States had purchased the Louisiana Territory from the French
at a fire-sale price. This massive new territory, which had doubled the
size of the United States, had put the question of slavery’s expansion at
the top of the national agenda. Many white Americans, including Presi-
dent Thomas Jefferson, thought that ending the external slave trade and
dispersing the domestic slave population would keep the United States
a white man’s republic and perhaps even lead to the disappearance of
slavery.
    The ban on the slave trade, however, lacked effective enforcement           Alexander
                                                                                Hamilton saw
measures and funding. Moreover, instead of freeing illegally imported
                                                                                America’s future
Africans, the act left their fate to the individual states, and many of those   as a metropoli-
states simply sold intercepted slaves at auction. Thus, the ban preserved       tan, commercial,
                                                                                industrial society,
the logic of property ownership in human beings. The new federal gov-           in contrast to
ernment protected slavery as much as it expanded democratic rights and          Thomas Jefferson’s
                                                                                nation of small
privileges for white men.14                                                     farmers. While
                                                                                both men had the
                                                                                ear of President
VI. Hamilton’s Financial System                                                 Washington,
                                                                                Hamilton’s vision
President George Washington’s cabinet choices reflected continuing polit-       proved most
                                                                                appealing and
ical tensions over the size and power of the federal government. The vice       enduring. John
president was John Adams, and Washington chose Alexander Hamilton               Trumbull, Portrait
                                                                                of Alexander
to be his secretary of the treasury. Both men wanted an active govern-          Hamilton, 1806.
ment that would promote prosperity by supporting American industry.             Wikimedia.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
152                                                                         ch a pter 6


              However, Washington chose Thomas Jefferson to be his secretary of state,
              and Jefferson was committed to restricting federal power and preserving
              an economy based on agriculture. Almost from the beginning, Washing-
              ton struggled to reconcile the Federalist and Republican (or Democratic-
              Republican) factions within his own administration.15
                  Alexander Hamilton believed that self-interest was the “most power-
              ful incentive of human actions.” Self-interest drove humans to accumu-
              late property, and that effort created commerce and industry. According
              to Hamilton, government had important roles to play in this process.
              First, the state should protect private property from theft. Second, ac-
              cording to Hamilton, the state should use human “passions” and “make
              them subservient to the public good.”16 In other words, a wise govern-
             ment would harness its citizens’ desire for property so that both private
             individuals and the state would benefit.
                  Hamilton, like many of his contemporary statesmen, did not believe
             the state should ensure an equal distribution of property. Inequality was
             understood as “the great & fundamental distinction in Society,” and
             Hamilton saw no reason why this should change. Instead, Hamilton
             wanted to tie the economic interests of wealthy Americans, or “monied
             men,” to the federal government’s financial health. If the rich needed
             the government, then they would direct their energies to making sure it
             remained solvent.17
                  Hamilton, therefore, believed that the federal government must be “a
              Repository of the Rights of the wealthy.”18 As the nation’s first secretary
             of the treasury, he proposed an ambitious financial plan to achieve just
             that.
                  The first part of Hamilton’s plan involved federal “assumption” of
             state debts, which were mostly left over from the Revolutionary War. The
             federal government would assume responsibility for the states’ unpaid
             debts, which totaled about $25 million. Second, Hamilton wanted Con-
             gress to create a bank—a Bank of the United States.
                  The goal of these proposals was to link federal power and the coun-
             try’s economic vitality. Under the assumption proposal, the states’
             ­creditors (people who owned state bonds or promissory notes) would
             turn their old notes in to the treasury and receive new federal notes of
             the same face value. Hamilton foresaw that these bonds would circulate
             like money, acting as “an engine of business, and instrument of industry
             and commerce.”19 This part of his plan, however, was controversial for
              two reasons.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  153


    First, many taxpayers objected to paying the full face value on old
notes, which had fallen in market value. Often the current holders had
purchased them from the original creditors for pennies on the dollar. To
pay them at full face value, therefore, would mean rewarding speculators
at taxpayer expense. Hamilton countered that government debts must be
honored in full, or else citizens would lose all trust in the government.
Second, many southerners objected that they had already paid their out-
standing state debts, so federal assumption would mean forcing them
to pay again for the debts of New Englanders. Nevertheless, President
Washington and Congress both accepted Hamilton’s argument. By the
end of 1794, 98 percent of the country’s domestic debt had been con-
verted into new federal bonds.20
    Hamilton’s plan for a Bank of the United States, similarly, won con-
gressional approval despite strong opposition. Thomas Jefferson and
other Republicans argued that the plan was unconstitutional; the Consti-
tution did not authorize Congress to create a bank. Hamilton, however,
argued that the bank was not only constitutional but also important for
the country’s prosperity. The Bank of the United States would fulfill sev-
eral needs. It would act as a convenient depository for federal funds. It
would print paper banknotes backed by specie (gold or silver). Its agents
would also help control inflation by periodically taking state bank notes
to their banks of origin and demanding specie in exchange, limiting the
amount of notes the state banks printed. Furthermore, it would give
wealthy people a vested interest in the federal government’s finances. The
government would control just 20 percent of the bank’s stock; the other
eighty percent would be owned by private investors. Thus, an “intimate
connexion” between the government and wealthy men would benefit
both, and this connection would promote American commerce.
    In 1791, therefore, Congress approved a twenty-year charter for the
Bank of the United States. The bank’s stocks, together with federal bonds,
created over $70 million in new financial instruments. These spurred the
formation of securities markets, which allowed the federal government
to borrow more money and underwrote the rapid spread of state-charted
banks and other private business corporations in the 1790s. For Federal-
ists, this was one of the major purposes of the federal government. For
opponents who wanted a more limited role for industry, however, or
who lived on the frontier and lacked access to capital, Hamilton’s system
seemed to reinforce class boundaries and give the rich inordinate power
over the federal government.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
154                                                                         ch a pter 6


                 Hamilton’s plan, furthermore, had another highly controversial ele-
             ment. In order to pay what it owed on the new bonds, the federal govern-
             ment needed reliable sources of tax revenue. In 1791, Hamilton proposed
             a federal excise tax on the production, sale, and consumption of a num-
             ber of goods, including whiskey.


             VII. The Whiskey Rebellion and Jay’s Treaty
             Grain was the most valuable cash crop for many American farmers. In
             the West, selling grain to a local distillery for alcohol production was typ-
             ically more profitable than shipping it over the Appalachians to eastern
             markets. Hamilton’s whiskey tax thus placed a special burden on western
             farmers. It seemed to divide the young republic in half—geographically
             between the East and West, economically between merchants and farm-
             ers, and culturally between cities and the countryside.
                 In the fall of 1791, sixteen men in western Pennsylvania, disguised in
             women’s clothes, assaulted a tax collector named Robert Johnson. They
             tarred and feathered him, and the local deputy marshals seeking justice
             met similar fates. They were robbed and beaten, whipped and flogged,
             tarred and feathered, and tied up and left for dead. The rebel farmers also
             adopted other protest methods from the Revolution and Shays’ Rebel-
             lion, writing local petitions and erecting liberty poles. For the next two
             years, tax collections in the region dwindled.
                 Then, in July 1794, groups of armed farmers attacked federal mar-
             shals and tax collectors, burning down at least two tax collectors’ homes.
             At the end of the month, an armed force of about seven thousand, led by
             the radical attorney David Bradford, robbed the U.S. mail and gathered
             about eight miles east of Pittsburgh. President Washington responded
             quickly.
                 First, Washington dispatched a committee of three distinguished
             Pennsylvanians to meet with the rebels and try to bring about a peaceful
             resolution. Meanwhile, he gathered an army of thirteen thousand militia-
             men in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. On September 19, Washington became the
             only sitting president to lead troops in the field, though he quickly turned
             over the army to the command of Henry Lee, a Revolutionary hero and
             the current governor of Virginia.
                 As the federal army moved westward, the farmers scattered. Hoping
             to make a dramatic display of federal authority, Alexander Hamilton
             oversaw the arrest and trial of a number of rebels. Many were released



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  155


because of a lack of evidence, and most of those who remained, includ-
ing two men sentenced to death for treason, were soon pardoned by the
president. The Whiskey Rebellion had shown that the federal govern-
ment was capable of quelling internal unrest. But it also demonstrated
that some citizens, especially poor westerners, viewed it as their enemy.21
    Around the same time, another national issue also aroused fierce pro-
test. Along with his vision of a strong financial system, Hamilton also
had a vision of a nation busily engaged in foreign trade. In his mind,
that meant pursuing a friendly relationship with one nation in particular:
Great Britain.
    America’s relationship with Britain since the end of the Revolution
had been tense, partly because of warfare between the British and French.
Their naval war threatened American shipping, and the impressment of
men into Britain’s navy terrorized American sailors. American trade could
be risky and expensive, and impressment threatened seafaring families.
Nevertheless, President Washington was conscious of American weak-
ness and was determined not to take sides. In April 1793, he officially
declared that the United States would remain neutral.22 With his blessing,
Hamilton’s political ally John Jay, who was currently serving as chief
justice of the Supreme Court, sailed to London to negotiate a treaty that
would satisfy both Britain and the United States.
    Jefferson and Madison strongly opposed these negotiations. They
mistrusted Britain and saw the treaty as the American state favoring Brit-
ain over France. The French had recently overthrown their own monar-
chy, and Republicans thought the United States should be glad to have
the friendship of a new revolutionary state. They also suspected that a
treaty with Britain would favor northern merchants and manufacturers
over the agricultural South.
    In November 1794, despite their misgivings, John Jay signed a “treaty
of amity, commerce, and navigation” with the British. Jay’s Treaty, as
it was commonly called, required Britain to abandon its military posi-
tions in the Northwest Territory (especially Fort Detroit, Fort Mackinac,
and Fort Niagara) by 1796. Britain also agreed to compensate American
merchants for their losses. The United States, in return, agreed to treat
Britain as its most prized trade partner, which meant tacitly supporting
Britain in its current conflict with France. Unfortunately, Jay had failed
to secure an end to impressment.23
    For Federalists, this treaty was a significant accomplishment. Jay’s
Treaty gave the United States, a relatively weak power, the ability to stay



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
156                                                                                       ch a pter 6


                      officially neutral in European wars, and it preserved American prosperity
                      by protecting trade. For Jefferson’s Republicans, however, the treaty was
                      proof of Federalist treachery. The Federalists had sided with a monarchy
                      against a republic, and they had submitted to British influence in Ameri-
                      can affairs without even ending impressment. In Congress, debate over
                      the treaty transformed the Federalists and Republicans from temporary
                      factions into two distinct (though still loosely organized) political parties.


                      VII. The French Revolution and the Limits of Liberty
                      In part, the Federalists were turning toward Britain because they feared
                      the most radical forms of democratic thought. In the wake of Shays’
                      Rebellion, the Whiskey Rebellion, and other internal protests, Federalists
                      sought to preserve social stability. The course of the French Revolution
                      seemed to justify their concerns.
                          In 1789, news had arrived in America that the French had revolted
                      against their king. Most Americans imagined that liberty was spreading




The mounting body count of the French Revolution included that of the queen and king, who were be-
headed in a public ceremony in early 1793, as depicted in the engraving. While Americans disdained the
concept of monarchy, the execution of King Louis XVI was regarded by many Americans as an abomi-
nation, an indication of the chaos and savagery reigning in France at the time. Charles Monnet (artist),
Antoine-Jean Duclos and Isidore-Stanislas Helman (engravers), Day of 21 January 1793 the death of Louis
Capet on the Place de la Révolution, 1794. Wikimedia.



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  157


from America to Europe, carried there by the returning French heroes
who had taken part in the American Revolution.
    Initially, nearly all Americans had praised the French Revolution.
Towns all over the country hosted speeches and parades on July 14 to
commemorate the day it began. Women had worn neoclassical dress to
honor republican principles, and men had pinned revolutionary cockades
to their hats. John Randolph, a Virginia planter, named two of his favor-
ite horses Jacobin and Sans-Culotte after French revolutionary factions.24
    In April 1793, a new French ambassador, “Citizen” Edmond-Charles
Genêt, arrived in the United States. During his tour of several cities,
Americans greeted him with wild enthusiasm. Citizen Genêt encouraged
Americans to act against Spain, a British ally, by attacking its colonies
of Florida and Louisiana. When President Washington refused, Genêt
threatened to appeal to the American people directly. In response, Wash-
ington demanded that France recall its diplomat. In the meantime, how-
ever, Genêt’s faction had fallen from power in France. Knowing that a
return home might cost him his head, he decided to remain in America.
    Genêt’s intuition was correct. A radical coalition of revolutionaries
had seized power in France. They initiated a bloody purge of their en-
emies, the Reign of Terror. As Americans learned about Genêt’s impropri-
ety and the mounting body count in France, many began to have second
thoughts about the French Revolution.
    Americans who feared that the French Revolution was spiraling out
of control tended to become Federalists. Those who remained hopeful
about the revolution tended to become Republicans. Not deterred by the
violence, Thomas Jefferson declared that he would rather see “half the
earth desolated” than see the French Revolution fail. “Were there but an
Adam and an Eve left in every country, and left free,” he wrote, “it would
be better than as it now is.”25 Meanwhile, the Federalists sought closer
ties with Britain.
    Despite the political rancor, in late 1796 there came one sign of hope:
the United States peacefully elected a new president. For now, as Wash-
ington stepped down and executive power changed hands, the country
did not descend into the anarchy that many leaders feared.
    The new president was John Adams, Washington’s vice president.
Adams was less beloved than the old general, and he governed a deeply
divided nation. The foreign crisis also presented him with a major test.
    In response to Jay’s Treaty, the French government authorized its ves-
sels to attack American shipping. To resolve this, President Adams sent



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
158                                                                         ch a pter 6


             envoys to France in 1797. The French insulted these diplomats. Some
             officials, whom the Americans code-named X, Y, and Z in their corre-
             spondence, hinted that negotiations could begin only after the Americans
             offered a bribe. When the story became public, this XYZ Affair infuriated
             American citizens. Dozens of towns wrote addresses to President Adams,
             pledging him their support against France. Many people seemed eager
             for war. “Millions for defense,” toasted South Carolina representative
             Robert Goodloe Harper, “but not one cent for tribute.”26
                 By 1798, the people of Charleston watched the ocean’s horizon ap-
             prehensively because they feared the arrival of the French navy at any
             moment. Many people now worried that the same ships that had aided
             Americans during the Revolutionary War might discharge an invasion
             force on their shores. Some southerners were sure that this force would
             consist of black troops from France’s Caribbean colonies, who would
             attack the southern states and cause their slaves to revolt. Many Ameri-
             cans also worried that France had covert agents in the country. In the
             streets of Charleston, armed bands of young men searched for French
             disorganizers. Even the little children prepared for the looming conflict
             by fighting with sticks.27
                 Meanwhile, during the crisis, New Englanders were some of the most
             outspoken opponents of France. In 1798, they found a new reason for
             Francophobia. An influential Massachusetts minister, Jedidiah Morse,
             announced to his congregation that the French Revolution had been
             hatched in a conspiracy led by a mysterious anti-Christian organization
             called the Illuminati. The story was a hoax, but rumors of Illuminati
             infiltration spread throughout New England like wildfire, adding a new
             dimension to the foreign threat.28
                 Against this backdrop of fear, the French Quasi-War, as it would
             come to be known, was fought on the Atlantic, mostly between French
             naval vessels and American merchant ships. During this crisis, however,
             anxiety about foreign agents ran high, and members of Congress took ac-
             tion to prevent internal subversion. The most controversial of these steps
             were the Alien and Sedition Acts. These two laws, passed in 1798, were
             intended to prevent French agents and sympathizers from compromising
             America’s resistance, but they also attacked Americans who criticized the
             president and the Federalist Party.
                 The Alien Act allowed the federal government to deport foreign na-
             tionals, or “aliens,” who seemed to pose a national security threat. Even
             more dramatically, the Sedition Act allowed the government to prosecute



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  159


anyone found to be speaking or publishing “false, scandalous, and mali-
cious writing” against the government.29
     These laws were not simply brought on by war hysteria. They re-
flected common assumptions about the nature of the American Revo-
lution and the limits of liberty. In fact, most of the advocates for the
Constitution and the First Amendment accepted that free speech simply
meant a lack of prior censorship or restraint, not a guarantee against
punishment. According to this logic, “licentious” or unruly speech made
society less free, not more. James Wilson, one of the principal architects
of the Constitution, argued that “every author is responsible when he at-
tacks the security or welfare of the government.”30
     In 1798, most Federalists were inclined to agree. Under the terms
of the Sedition Act, they indicted and prosecuted several Republican
­printers—and even a Republican congressman who had criticized Presi-
 dent Adams. Meanwhile, although the Adams administration never en-
 forced the Alien Act, its passage was enough to convince some foreign
 nationals to leave the country. For the president and most other Federal-
 ists, the Alien and Sedition Acts represented a continuation of a conserva-
 tive rather than radical American Revolution.
     However, the Alien and Sedition Acts caused a backlash in two ways.
 First, shocked opponents articulated a new and expansive vision for
 liberty. The New York lawyer Tunis Wortman, for example, demanded
 an “absolute independence” of the press.31 Likewise, the Virginia judge
George Hay called for “any publication whatever criminal” to be exempt
from legal punishment.32 Many Americans began to argue that free speech
 meant the ability to say virtually anything without fear of prosecution.
     Second, James Madison and Thomas Jefferson helped organize op-
 position from state governments. Ironically, both of them had expressed
 support for the principle behind the Sedition Act in previous years. Jeffer-
 son, for example, had written to Madison in 1789 that the nation should
 punish citizens for speaking “false facts” that injured the country.33
 Never­theless, both men now opposed the Alien and Sedition Acts on
 constitutional grounds. In 1798, Jefferson made this point in a resolution
 adopted by the Kentucky state legislature. A short time later, the Virginia
 legislature adopted a similar document written by Madison.
     The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions argued that the national
 government’s authority was limited to the powers expressly granted by
 the U.S. Constitution. More importantly, they asserted that the states
 could declare federal laws unconstitutional. For the time being, these



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
160                                                                         ch a pter 6


             r­ esolutions were simply gestures of defiance. Their bold claim, however,
              would have important effects in later decades.
                   In just a few years, many Americans’ feelings toward France had
              changed dramatically. Far from rejoicing in the “light of freedom,” many
              Americans now feared the “contagion” of French-style liberty. Debates
              over the French Revolution in the 1790s gave Americans some of their
              earliest opportunities to articulate what it meant to be American. Did
              American national character rest on a radical and universal vision of
              human liberty? Or was America supposed to be essentially pious and
              traditional, an outgrowth of Great Britain? They couldn’t agree. It was
              on this cracked foundation that many conflicts of the nineteenth century
              would rest.


             VIII. Religious Freedom
             One reason the debates over the French Revolution became so heated
             was that Americans were unsure about their own religious future. The
             Illuminati scare of 1798 was just one manifestation of this fear. Across
             the United States, a slow but profound shift in attitudes toward religion
             and government began.
                 In 1776, none of the American state governments observed the sepa-
             ration of church and state. On the contrary, all thirteen states either had
             established, official, and tax-supported state churches, or at least required
             their officeholders to profess a certain faith. Most officials believed this
             was necessary to protect morality and social order. Over the next six
             decades, however, that changed. In 1833, the final state, Massachusetts,
             stopped supporting an official religious denomination. Historians call
             that gradual process disestablishment.
                 In many states, the process of disestablishment had started before the
             creation of the Constitution. South Carolina, for example, had been nom-
             inally Anglican before the Revolution, but it had dropped denominational
             restrictions in its 1778 constitution. Instead, it now allowed any church
             consisting of at least fifteen adult males to become “incorporated,” or rec-
             ognized for tax purposes as a state-supported church. Churches needed
             only to agree to a set of basic Christian theological tenets, which were
             vague enough that most denominations could support them.34
                 South Carolina tried to balance religious freedom with the religious
             practice that was supposed to be necessary for social order. Officehold-
             ers were still expected to be Christians; their oaths were witnessed by



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  161


God, they were compelled by their religious beliefs to tell the truth, and
they were called to live according to the Bible. This list of minimal re-
quirements came to define acceptable Christianity in many states. As new
Christian denominations proliferated between 1780 and 1840, however,
more and more Christians fell outside this definition.
     South Carolina continued its general establishment law until 1790,
when a constitutional revision removed the establishment clause and reli-
gious restrictions on officeholders. Many other states, though, continued
to support an established church well into the nineteenth century. The
federal Constitution did not prevent this. The religious freedom clause in
the Bill of Rights, during these decades, limited the federal government but
not state governments. It was not until 1833 that a state supreme court
decision ended Massachusetts’s support for the Congregational Church.
     Many political leaders, including Thomas Jefferson and James Madi-
son, favored disestablishment because they saw the relationship between
church and state as a tool of oppression. Jefferson proposed a Statute
for Religious Freedom in the Virginia state assembly in 1779, but his bill
failed in the overwhelmingly Anglican legislature. Madison proposed it
again in 1785, and it defeated a rival bill that would have given equal
revenue to all Protestant churches. Instead Virginia would not use public
money to support religion. “The Religion then of every man,” Jefferson
wrote, “must be left to the conviction and conscience of every man; and
it is the right of every man to exercise it as these may dictate.”35
     At the federal level, the delegates to the Constitutional Convention of
1787 easily agreed that the national government should not have an of-
ficial religion. This principle was upheld in 1791 when the First Amend-
ment was ratified, with its guarantee of religious liberty. The limits of
federal disestablishment, however, required discussion. The federal gov-
ernment, for example, supported Native American missionaries and con-
gressional chaplains. Well into the nineteenth century, debate raged over
whether the postal service should operate on Sundays, and whether non-
Christians could act as witnesses in federal courts. Americans continued
to struggle to understand what it meant for Congress not to “establish”
a religion.


IX. The Election of 1800
Meanwhile, the Sedition and Alien Acts expired in 1800 and 1801. They
had been relatively ineffective at suppressing dissent. On the contrary,



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
162                                                                                        ch a pter 6




The year 1800 brought about a host of changes in government, in particular the first successful and
peaceful transfer of power from one political party to another. But the year was important for another
reason: the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. (pictured here in 1800) was finally opened to be occupied by
Congress, the Supreme Court, the Library of Congress, and the courts of the District of Columbia. Wil-
liam Russell Birch, A view of the Capitol of Washington before it was burnt down by the British, c. 1800.
Wikimedia.



                      they were much more important for the loud reactions they had inspired.
                      They had helped many Americans decide what they didn’t want from
                      their national government.
                           By 1800, therefore, President Adams had lost the confidence of
                      many Americans. They had let him know it. In 1798, for instance, he
                      had issued a national thanksgiving proclamation. Instead of enjoying
                      a day of celebration and thankfulness, Adams and his family had been
                      forced by rioters to flee the capital city of Philadelphia until the day was
                      over. Conversely, his prickly independence had also put him at odds
                      with Alexander Hamilton, the leader of his own party, who offered him
                      little support. After four years in office, Adams found himself widely
                      reviled.


               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  163


    In the election of 1800, therefore, the Republicans defeated Adams in
a bitter and complicated presidential race. During the election, one Fed-
eralist newspaper article predicted that a Republican victory would fill
America with “murder, robbery, rape, adultery, and incest.”36 A Repub-
lican newspaper, on the other hand, flung sexual slurs against President
Adams, saying he had “neither the force and firmness of a man, nor the
gentleness and sensibility of a woman.” Both sides predicted disaster and
possibly war if the other should win.37
    In the end, the contest came down to a tie between two Republicans,
Thomas Jefferson of Virginia and Aaron Burr of New York, who each
had seventy-three electoral votes. (Adams had sixty-five.) Burr was sup-
posed to be a candidate for vice president, not president, but under the
Constitution’s original rules, a tie-breaking vote had to take place in the
House of Representatives. It was controlled by Federalists bitter at Jeffer-
son. House members voted dozens of times without breaking the tie. On
the thirty-sixth ballot, Thomas Jefferson emerged victorious.
    Republicans believed they had saved the United States from grave
danger. An assembly of Republicans in New York City called the election
a “bloodless revolution.” They thought of their victory as a revolution
in part because the Constitution (and eighteenth-century political theory)




                                                          This image attacks Jefferson’s support
                                                          of the French Revolution and religious
                                                          freedom. The letter, “To Mazzei,” refers
                                                          to a 1796 correspondence that criticized
                                                          the Federalists and, by association, Presi-
                                                          dent Washington. Providential Detection,
                                                          1797. Courtesy American Antiquarian
                                                          Society. Attribution-NonCommercial-Sha-
                                                          reAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA
                                                          4.0).



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
164                                                                         ch a pter 6


             made no provision for political parties. The Republicans thought they
             were fighting to rescue the country from an aristocratic takeover, not just
             taking part in a normal constitutional process.
                 In his first inaugural address, however, Thomas Jefferson offered an
             olive branch to the Federalists. He pledged to follow the will of the Amer-
             ican majority, whom he believed were Republicans, but to respect the
             rights of the Federalist minority. His election set an important precedent.
             Adams accepted his electoral defeat and left the White House peacefully.
             “The revolution of 1800,” Jefferson wrote years later, did for American
             principles what the Revolution of 1776 had done for its structure. But
             this time, the revolution was accomplished not “by the sword” but “by
             the rational and peaceable instrument of reform, the suffrage of the peo-
             ple.”38 Four years later, when the Twelfth Amendment changed the rules
             for presidential elections to prevent future deadlocks, it was designed to
             accommodate the way political parties worked.
                 Despite Adams’s and Jefferson’s attempts to tame party politics,
             though, the tension between federal power and the liberties of states and
             individuals would exist long into the nineteenth century. And while Jef-
             ferson’s administration attempted to decrease federal influence, Chief
             Justice John Marshall, an Adams appointee, worked to increase the au-
             thority of the Supreme Court. These competing agendas clashed most
             famously in the 1803 case of Marbury v. Madison, which Marshall used
             to establish a major precedent.
                 The Marbury case seemed insignificant at first. The night before leav-
             ing office in early 1801, Adams had appointed several men to serve as
             justices of the peace in Washington, D.C. By making these “midnight ap-
             pointments,” Adams had sought to put Federalists into vacant positions
             at the last minute. On taking office, however, Jefferson and his secretary
             of state, James Madison, had refused to deliver the federal commissions
             to the men Adams had appointed. Several of the appointees, including
             William Marbury, sued the government, and the case was argued before
             the Supreme Court.
                 Marshall used Marbury’s case to make a clever ruling. On the issue
             of the commissions, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Jefferson
             administration. But Chief Justice Marshall went further in his decision,
             ruling that the Supreme Court reserved the right to decide whether an act
             of Congress violated the Constitution. In other words, the court assumed
             the power of judicial review. This was a major (and lasting) blow to the
             Republican agenda, especially after 1810, when the Supreme Court ex-



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  165


tended judicial review to state laws. Jefferson was particularly frustrated
by the decision, arguing that the power of judicial review “would make
the Judiciary a despotic branch.”39


X. Conclusion
A grand debate over political power engulfed the young United States.
The Constitution ensured that there would be a strong federal govern-
ment capable of taxing, waging war, and making law, but it could never
resolve the young nation’s many conflicting constituencies. The Whiskey
Rebellion proved that the nation could stifle internal dissent but exposed
a new threat to liberty. Hamilton’s banking system provided the nation
with credit but also constrained frontier farmers. The Constitution’s
guarantee of religious liberty conflicted with many popular prerogatives.
Dissension only deepened, and as the 1790s progressed, Americans be-
came bitterly divided over political parties and foreign wars.
    During the ratification debates, Alexander Hamilton had written of
the wonders of the Constitution. “A nation, without a national gov-
ernment,” he wrote, would be “an awful spectacle.” But, he added,
“the establishment of a Constitution, in time of profound peace, by
the voluntary consent of a whole people, is a prodigy,” a miracle that
should be witnessed “with trembling anxiety.”40 Anti-Federalists had
grave concerns about the Constitution, but even they could celebrate
the idea of national unity. By 1795, even the staunchest critics would
have grudgingly agreed with Hamilton’s convictions about the Constitu-
tion. Yet these same individuals could also take the cautions in Washing-
ton’s 1796 farewell address to heart. “There is an opinion,” Washington
wrote, “that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the admin-
istration of the government and serve to keep alive the spirit of liberty.”
This, he conceded, was probably true, but in a republic, he said, the
danger was not too little partisanship, but too much. “A fire not to
be quenched,” Washington warned, “it demands a uniform vigilance
to prevent its bursting into a flame, lest, instead of warming, it should
consume.”41
    For every parade, thanksgiving proclamation, or grand procession
honoring the unity of the nation, there was also some political contro-
versy reminding American citizens of how fragile their union was. And as
party differences and regional quarrels tested the federal government, the
new nation increasingly explored the limits of its democracy.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
166                                                                             ch a pter 6



             XI. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Tara Strauch, with content contributions by Marco
             Basile, Nathaniel C. Green, Brenden Kennedy, Spencer McBride, Andrea Nero,
             Cara Rogers, Tara Strauch, Michael Harrison Taylor, Jordan Taylor, Kevin Wis-
             niewski, and Ben Wright.
                 Recommended citation: Marco Basile et al., “A New Nation,” Tara Strauch,
             ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright (Stanford, CA:
             Stanford University Press, 2019).

             Notes to Ch a p ter 6
                  1. Francis Hopkinson, An Account of the Grand Federal Procession, Phila-
             delphia, July 4, 1788 (Philadelphia: Carey, 1788).
                  2. George Washington, Thanksgiving Proclamation, October, 3, 1789; Fed.
             Reg., Presidential Proclamations, 1791–1991.
                  3. Hampshire Gazette (CT), September 13, 1786.
                  4. James Madison, The Federalist Papers, (New York: Signet Classics, 2003),
             no. 63.
                  5. Woody Holton, Unruly Americans and the Origins of the Constitution
             (New York: Hill and Wang, 2007), 8–9.
                  6. Madison took an active role during the convention. He also did more
             than anyone else to shape historians’ understandings of the convention by taking
             meticulous notes. Many of the quotes included here come from Madison’s notes.
             To learn more about this important document, read Mary Sarah Bilder, Madi-
             son’s Hand: Revising the Constitutional Convention (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
             University Press, 2015).
                  7. Virginia (Randolph) Plan as Amended (National Archives Microfilm Pub-
             lication M866, 1 roll); The Official Records of the Constitutional Convention;
             Records of the Continental and Confederation Congresses and the Constitutional
             Convention, 1774–1789, Record Group 360; National Archives.
                  8. Richard Beeman, Plain, Honest Men: The Making of the American Con-
             stitution (New York: Random House, 2009), 114.
                  9. Herbert J. Storing, What the Anti-Federalists Were For: The Political
             Thought of the Opponents of the Constitution (Chicago: University of Chicago
             Press, 1981), 16.
                  10. Ray Raphael, Mr. President: How and Why the Founders Created a Chief
             Executive (New York: Knopf, 2012), 50. See also Kathleen Bartoloni-­Tuazon,
             For Fear of an Elected King: George Washington and the Presidential Title Con-
             troversy of 1789 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2014).
                  11. David J. Siemers, Ratifying the Republic: Antifederalists and Federalists
             in Constitutional Time (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002).
                  12. Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay, The Federalist Pa-
             pers, ed. Ian Shapiro (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009).
                  13. Pauline Maier, Ratification: The People Debate the Constitution, 1787–
             1788 (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2010), 225–237.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  167


      14. David Waldstreicher, Slavery’s Constitution: From Revolution to Ratifi-
cation (New York: Hill and Wang, 2009).
      15. Carson Holloway, Hamilton Versus Jefferson in the Washington Ad-
ministration: Completing the Founding or Betraying the Founding? (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2015).
      16. Alexander Hamilton, The Works of Alexander Hamilton, Volume 1, ed.
Henry Cabot Lodge, ed. (New York: Putnam, 1904), 70, 408.
      17. Alexander Hamilton, Report on Manufactures (New York: Childs and
Swaine, 1791).
      18. James H. Hutson, ed., Supplement to Max Farrand’s the Records of the
Federal Convention of 1787 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1987), 119.
      19. Hamilton, Report on Manufactures.
      20. Richard Sylla, “National Foundations: Public Credit, the National Bank,
and Securities Markets,” in Founding Choices: American Economic Policy in the
1790s, ed. Douglas A. Irwin and Richard Sylla (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2011), 68.
      21. Thomas P. Slaughter, The Whiskey Rebellion: Frontier Epilogue to the
American Revolution (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986).
      22. “Proclamation of Neutrality, 1793,” in A Compilation of the Messages
and Papers of the Presidents Prepared Under the Direction of the Joint Commit-
tee on printing, of the House and Senate Pursuant to an Act of the Fifty-Second
Congress of the United States (New York: Bureau of National Literature, 1897).
      23. United States, Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, signed at
London November 19, 1794, Submitted to the Senate June 8, Resolution of Ad-
vice and Consent, on condition, June 24, 1795. Ratified by the United States
August 14, 1795. Ratified by Great Britain October 28, 1795. Ratifications ex-
changed at London October 28, 1795. Proclaimed February 29, 1796.
      24. Elizabeth Fox-Genovese and Eugene D. Genovese, The Mind of the Mas-
ter Class: History and Faith in the Southern Slaveholders Worldview (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2005), 18.
      25. “From Thomas Jefferson to William Short, 3 January 1793,” Found-
ers Online, National Archives. http://​founders​.archives​.gov/​documents/​Jefferson
/​01​-25​-02​-0016, last modified June 29, 2015; The Papers of Thomas Jefferson,
vol. 25, 1 January–10 May 1793, ed. John Catanzariti (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1992), 14–17.
      26. Robert Goodloe Harper, June 18, 1798, quoted in American Daily Ad-
vertiser (Philadelphia), June 20, 1798.
      27. Robert J. Alderson Jr., This Bright Era of Happy Revolutions: French
Consul Michel-Ange-Bernard Mangourit and International Republicanism in
Charleston, 1792–1794 (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2008).
      28. Rachel Hope Cleves, The Reign of Terror in America: Visions of Violence
from Anti-Jacobinism to Antislavery (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2012), 47.
      29. Alien Act, July 6, 1798, and An Act in Addition to the Act, Entitled “An
Act for the Punishment of Certain Crimes Against the United States,” July 14,



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
168                                                                            ch a pter 6


             1798; Fifth Congress; Enrolled Acts and Resolutions; General Records of the
             United States Government; Record Group 11; National Archives.
                  30. James Wilson, Congressional Debate, December 1, 1787, in Jonathan
             Elliot, ed., The Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the
             Federal Constitution as Recommended by the General Convention at Philadel-
             phia in 1787, Vol. 2 (New York: s.n., 1888) 448–450.
                  31. Tunis Wortman, A Treatise Concerning Political Enquiry, and the Lib-
             erty of the Press (New York: Forman, 1800), 181.
                  32. George Hay, An Essay on the Liberty of the Press (Philadelphia: s.n.,
             1799), 43.
                  33. Thomas Jefferson to James Madison, August 28, 1789, from The Works
             of Thomas Jefferson in Twelve Volumes, Federal Edition, ed. Paul Leicester Ford.
             http://​www​.loc​.gov/​resource/​mtj1​.011​_0853​_0861.
                  34. Francis Newton Thorpe, ed., The Federal and State Constitutions, Co-
             lonial Charters, and Other Organic Laws of the States, Territories, and Colonies
             Now or Heretofore Forming the United States of America Compiled and Edited
             Under the Act of Congress of June 30, 1906 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government
             Printing Office, 1909).
                  35. Thomas Jefferson, An Act for Establishing Religious Freedom, 16 Janu-
             ary 1786, Manuscript, Records of the General Assembly, Enrolled Bills, Record
             Group 78, Library of Virginia.
                  36. Catherine Allgor, Parlor Politics: In Which the Ladies of Washington
             Help Build a City and a Government (Charlottesville: University of Virginia
             Press, 2000), 14.
                  37. James T. Callender, The Prospect Before Us (Richmond: s.n., 1800).
                  38. Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Spencer Roane, September 6, 1819, in
             The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, 20 vols., ed. Albert Ellery Bergh (Washington,
             DC: Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association of the United States, 1903), 142.
                  39. Harold H. Bruff, Untrodden Ground: How Presidents Interpret the Con-
             stitution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), 65.
                  40. Alexander Hamilton, The Federalist Papers (New York: Signet Classics,
             2003), no. 85.
                  41. George Washington, Farewell Address, Annals of Congress, 4th Con-
             gress, 2869–2870.

             R e c omm e n d e d R e a din g
             Allgor, Catherine. Parlor Politics: In Which the Ladies of Washington Help Build
                 a City and a Government. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2000.
             Appleby, Joyce. Inheriting the Revolution: The First Generation of Americans.
                 Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2001.
             Bartolini-Tuazon, Kathleen. For Fear of an Elective King: George Washington
                 and the Presidential Title Controversy of 1789. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
                 sity Press, 2014.
             Beeman, Richard, Stephen Botein, and Edward C. Carter II, eds. Beyond Confed-
                 eration: Origins of the Constitution and American National Identity. Chapel
                 Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987.

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
A N e w N a t i o n  169


Bilder, Mary Sarah. Madison’s Hand: Revising the Constitutional Convention.
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.
Bouton, Terry. “A Road Closed: Rural Insurgency in Post-Independence Pennsyl-
    vania.” Journal of American History 87, no. 3 (December 2000): 855–887.
Cunningham, Noble E. The Jeffersonian Republicans: The Formation of Party Or-
    ganization, 1789–1801. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1967.
Dunn, Susan. Jefferson’s Second Revolution: The Election of 1800 and the Tri-
    umph of Republicanism. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2004.
Edling, Max. A Revolution in Favor of Government: Origins of the U.S. Consti-
    tution and the Making of the American State. New York: Oxford University
    Press, 2003
Gordon-Reed, Annette. The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family.
    New York: Norton, 2008.
Halperin, Terri Diane. The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798: Testing the Constitu-
    tion. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2016.
Holton, Woody. Unruly Americans and the Origins of the Constitution. New
    York: Hill and Wang, 2007.
Kierner, Cynthia A. Martha Jefferson Randolph, Daughter of Monticello: Her
    Life and Times. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012.
Maier, Pauline. Ratification: The People Debate the Constitution, 1787–1788.
    New York: Simon and Schuster, 2010.
Papenfuse, Eric Robert. “Unleashing the ‘Wildness’: The Mobilization of Grass-
    roots Antifederalism in Maryland.” Journal of the Early Republic 16, no. 1
    (Spring 1996): 73–106.
Pasley, Jeffrey L. The First Presidential Contest: 1796 and the Founding of Amer-
    ican Democracy. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 2013.
Rakove, Jack N. Original Meanings: Politics and Ideas in the Making of the Con-
    stitution. New York: Vintage Books, 1996.
Salmon, Marylynn. Women and the Law of Property in Early America. Chapel
    Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1989.
Sharp, James Roger. American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in
    Crisis. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1993.
Slaughter, Thomas P. The Whiskey Rebellion: Frontier Epilogue to the American
    Revolution. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Smith-Rosenberg, Carroll. “Dis-Covering the Subject of the ‘Great Constitu-
    tional Discussion,’ 1786–1789.” Journal of American History 79, no. 3 (De-
    cember 1992): 841–873.
Taylor, Alan. William Cooper’s Town: Power and Persuasion on the Frontier of
    the Early American Republic. New York: Vintage, 1996.
Waldstreicher, David. In the Midst of Perpetual Fetes : The Making of American
    Nationalism, 1776–1820. Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press,
    1997.
Wood, Gordon. Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815.
    Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Zagarri, Rosemarie. Revolutionary Backlash: Women and Politics in the Early
    American Republic. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
7
The Early Republic

I. Introduction
Thomas Jefferson’s electoral victory over John Adams—and the larger           America guided
                                                                              by wisdom
victory of the Republicans over the Federalists—was but one of many           An allegorical
changes in the early republic. Some, like Jefferson’s victory, were accom-    representation of
                                                                              the United States
plished peacefully, and others violently. The wealthy and the powerful,
                                                                              depicting their
middling and poor whites, Native Americans, free and enslaved African         independence
Americans, influential and poor women: all demanded a voice in the new        and prosperity,
                                                                              1815. Library of
nation that Thomas Paine called an “asylum” for liberty.1 All would, in       Congress.
their own way, lay claim to the freedom and equality promised, if not
fully realized, by the Revolution.




             © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                      Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  171



II. Free and Enslaved Black Americans and
the Challenge to Slavery
Led by the slave Gabriel, close to one thousand enslaved men planned
to end slavery in Virginia by attacking Richmond in late August 1800.
Some of the conspirators would set diversionary fires in the city’s ware-
house district. Others would attack Richmond’s white residents, seize
weapons, and capture Virginia governor James Monroe. On August 30,
two enslaved men revealed the plot to their master, who notified authori-
ties. Faced with bad weather, Gabriel and other leaders postponed the
attack until the next night, giving Governor Monroe and the militia time
to capture the conspirators. After briefly escaping, Gabriel was seized,
tried, and hanged along with twenty-five others. Their executions sent
the message that others would be punished if they challenged slavery.
Subsequently, the Virginia government increased restrictions on free peo-
ple of color.
    Gabriel’s Rebellion, as the plot came to be known, taught Virginia’s
white residents several lessons. First, it suggested that enslaved blacks
were capable of preparing and carrying out a sophisticated and violent
revolution—undermining white supremacist assumptions about the in-
herent intellectual inferiority of blacks. Furthermore, it demonstrated
that white efforts to suppress news of other slave revolts—especially the
1791 slave rebellion in Haiti—had failed. Not only did some literate
slaves read accounts of the successful attack in Virginia’s newspapers,
others heard about the rebellion firsthand when slaveholding refugees
from Haiti arrived in Virginia with their slaves after July 1793.
    The Haitian Revolution (1791–1804) inspired free and enslaved
black Americans, and terrified white Americans. Port cities in the United
States were flooded with news and refugees. Free people of color em-
braced the revolution, understanding it as a call for full abolition and
the rights of citizenship denied in the United States. Over the next several
decades, black Americans continually looked to Haiti as an inspiration
in their struggle for freedom. For example, in 1829 David Walker, a
black abolitionist in Boston, wrote an Appeal that called for resistance
to slavery and racism. Walker called Haiti the “glory of the blacks and
terror of the tyrants” and said that Haitians, “according to their word,
are bound to protect and comfort us.” Haiti also proved that, given
equal opportunities, people of color could achieve as much as whites.2 In




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
172                                                                         chap ter 7


             1826 the third college graduate of color in the United States, John Russ-
             wurm, gave a commencement address at Bowdoin College, noting that,
             “Haytiens have adopted the republican form of government . . . [and] in
             no country are the rights and privileges of citizens and foreigners more
             respected, and crimes less frequent.”3 In 1838 the Colored American,
             an early black newspaper, professed that “no one who reads, with an
             unprejudiced mind, the history of Hayti . . . can doubt the capacity of
             colored men, nor the propriety of removing all their disabilities.”4 Haiti,
             and the activism it inspired, sent the message that enslaved and free
             blacks could not be omitted from conversations about the meaning of
             liberty and equality. Their words and actions—on plantations, streets,
             and the printed page—left an indelible mark on early national political
             culture.
                 The black activism inspired by Haiti’s revolution was so powerful
             that anxious white leaders scrambled to use the violence of the Haitian
             revolt to reinforce white supremacy and pro-slavery views by limiting the
             social and political lives of people of color. White publications mocked
             black Americans as buffoons, ridiculing calls for abolition and equal
             rights. The most (in)famous of these, the “Bobalition” broadsides, pub-
             lished in Boston in the 1810s, crudely caricatured African Americans.
             Widely distributed materials like these became the basis for racist ideas
             that thrived in the nineteenth century. But such ridicule also implied that
             black Americans’ presence in the political conversation was significant
             enough to require it. The need to reinforce such an obvious difference
             between whiteness and blackness implied that the differences might not
             be so obvious after all.
                 Henry Moss, a slave in Virginia, became arguably the most famous
             black man of the day when white spots appeared on his body in 1792,
             turning him visibly white within three years. As his skin changed, Moss
             marketed himself as “a great curiosity” in Philadelphia and soon earned
             enough money to buy his freedom. He met the great scientists of the
             era—including Samuel Stanhope Smith and Dr. Benjamin Rush—who
             joyously deemed Moss to be living proof of their theory that “the Black
             Color (as it is called) of the Negroes is derived from the leprosy.”5 Some-
             thing, somehow, was “curing” Moss of his blackness. In the whitening
             body of slave-turned-patriot-turned-curiosity, many Americans fostered
             ideas of race that would cause major problems in the years ahead.
                 The first decades of the new American republic coincided with a
             radical shift in understandings of race. Politically and culturally, En-
             lightenment thinking fostered beliefs in common humanity, the possibil-

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  173




The idea and image of black Haitian revolutionaries sent shock waves throughout white America. That
black slaves and freed people might turn violent against whites, so obvious in this image where a black
soldier holds up the head of a white soldier, remained a serious fear in the hearts and minds of white South-
erners throughout the antebellum period. January Suchodolski, Battle at San Domingo, 1845. Wikimedia.




ity of societal progress, the remaking of oneself, and the importance of
one’s social and ecological environment—a four-pronged revolt against
the hierarchies of the Old World. Yet a tension arose due to Enlighten-
ment thinkers’ desire to classify and order the natural world. Carolus
Linnaeus, Comte de Buffon, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, and others
created connections between race and place as they divided the racial
“types” of the world according to skin color, cranial measurements, and
hair. They claimed that years under the hot sun and tropical climate of
Africa darkened the skin and reconfigured the skulls of the African race,
whereas the cold northern latitudes of Europe molded and sustained the
“Caucasian” race. The environments endowed both races with respec-
tive characteristics, which accounted for differences in humankind trac-
ing back to a common ancestry. A universal human nature, therefore,

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
174                                                                         chap ter 7


             housed not fundamental differences but rather the “civilized” and the
             “primitive”—two poles on a scale of social progress.
                 Informed by European anthropology and republican optimism,
             Americans confronted their own uniquely problematic racial landscape.
             In 1787, Samuel Stanhope Smith published his treatise Essay on the
             Causes of the Variety of Complexion and Figure in the Human Species,
             which further articulated the theory of racial change and suggested that
             improving the social environment would tap into the innate equality of
             humankind and dramatically uplift nonwhite races. The proper society,
             he and others believed, could gradually “whiten” men the way nature
             spontaneously chose to whiten Henry Moss. Thomas Jefferson disagreed.
             While Jefferson thought Native Americans could improve and become
             “civilized,” he declared in his Notes on the State of Virginia (1784) that
             black people were incapable of mental improvement and that they might
             even have a separate ancestry—a theory known as polygenesis, or mul-
             tiple creations. His belief in polygenesis was less to justify slavery—slave-
             holders universally rejected the theory as antibiblical and thus a threat to
             their primary instrument of justification, the Bible—and more to justify
             schemes for a white America, such as the plan to gradually send freed
             slaves to Africa. Many Americans believed nature had made the white
             and black races too different to peacefully coexist, and they viewed Afri-
             can colonization as the solution to America’s racial problem.
                 Jefferson’s Notes on the State of Virginia sparked considerable back-
             lash from antislavery and black communities. The celebrated black sur-
             veyor Benjamin Banneker, for example, immediately wrote to Jefferson
             and demanded he “eradicate that train of absurd and false ideas” and
             instead embrace the belief that we are “all of one flesh” and with “all the
             same sensations and endowed . . . with the same faculties.”6 Many years
             later, in his Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World (1829), David
             Walker channeled decades of black protest, simultaneously denouncing
             the moral rot of slavery and racism while praising the inner strength of
             the race.
                 Jefferson had his defenders. White men such as Charles Caldwell and
             Samuel George Morton hardened Jefferson’s skepticism with the “bio-
             logical” case for blacks and whites not only having separate creations
             but actually being different species, a position increasingly articulated
             throughout the antebellum period. Few Americans subscribed wholesale
             to such theories, but many shared beliefs in white supremacy. As the
             decades passed, white Americans were forced to acknowledge that if the



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  175


black population was indeed whitening, it resulted from interracial sex
and not the environment. The sense of inspiration and wonder that fol-
lowed Henry Moss in the 1790s would have been impossible just a gen-
eration later.


III. Jeffersonian Republicanism
Free and enslaved black Americans were not alone in pushing against
political hierarchies. Jefferson’s election to the presidency in 1800 rep-
resented a victory for non-elite white Americans in their bid to assume
more direct control over the government. Elites had made no secret of
their hostility toward the direct control of government by the people. In
both private correspondence and published works, many of the nation’s
founders argued that pure democracy would lead to anarchy. Massa-
chusetts Federalist Fisher Ames spoke for many of his colleagues when
he lamented the dangers that democracy posed because it depended on
public opinion, which “shifts with every current of caprice.” Jefferson’s
election, for Federalists like Ames, heralded a slide “down into the mire
of a democracy.”7
    Indeed, many political leaders and non-elite citizens believed Jefferson
embraced the politics of the masses. “In a government like ours it is the
duty of the Chief-magistrate . . . to unite in himself the confidence of the
whole people,” Jefferson wrote in 1810.8 Nine years later, looking back
on his monumental election, Jefferson again linked his triumph to the
political engagement of ordinary citizens: “The revolution of 1800 . . .
was as real a revolution in the principles of our government as that of
76 was in it’s form,” he wrote, “not effected indeed by the sword . . . but
by the rational and peaceable instrument of reform, the suffrage [voting]
of the people.”9 Jefferson desired to convince Americans, and the world,
that a government that answered directly to the people would lead to
lasting national union, not anarchic division. He wanted to prove that
free people could govern themselves democratically.
    Jefferson set out to differentiate his administration from the Federal-
ists. He defined American union by the voluntary bonds of fellow citizens
toward one another and toward the government. In contrast, the Fed-
eralists supposedly imagined a union defined by expansive state power
and public submission to the rule of aristocratic elites. For Jefferson,
the American nation drew its “energy” and its strength from the “confi-
dence” of a “reasonable” and “rational” people.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
176                                                                         chap ter 7


                 Republican celebrations often credited Jefferson with saving the na-
             tion’s republican principles. In a move that enraged Federalists, they used
             the image of George Washington, who had passed away in 1799, linking
             the republican virtue Washington epitomized to the democratic liberty
             Jefferson championed. Leaving behind the military pomp of power-­
             obsessed Federalists, Republicans had peacefully elected the scribe of
             national independence, the philosopher-patriot who had battled tyranny
             with his pen, not with a sword or a gun.
                 The celebrations of Jefferson’s presidency and the defeat of the Fed-
             eralists expressed many citizens’ willingness to assert greater direct con-
             trol over the government as citizens. The definition of citizenship was
             changing. Early American national identity was coded masculine, just as
             it was coded white and wealthy; yet, since the Revolution, women had
             repeatedly called for a place in the conversation. Mercy Otis Warren was
             one of the most noteworthy female contributors to the public ratification
             debate over the Constitution of 1787 and 1788, but women all over the
             country were urged to participate in the discussion over the Constitu-
             tion. “It is the duty of the American ladies, in a particular manner, to
             interest themselves in the success of the measures that are now pursuing
             by the Federal Convention for the happiness of America,” a Philadel-
             phia essayist announced. “They can retain their rank as rational beings
             only in a free government. In a monarchy . . . they will be considered as
             valuable members of a society, only in proportion as they are capable
             of being mothers for soldiers, who are the pillars of crowned heads.”10
             American women were more than mothers to soldiers; they were moth-
             ers to liberty.
                 Historians have used the term Republican Motherhood to describe
             the early American belief that women were essential in nurturing the
             principles of liberty in the citizenry. Women would pass along impor-
             tant values of independence and virtue to their children, ensuring that
             each generation cherished the same values of the American Revolution.
             Because of these ideas, women’s actions became politicized. Republican
             partisans even described women’s choice of sexual partner as crucial to
             the health and well-being of both the party and the nation. “The fair
             Daughters of America” should “never disgrace themselves by giving their
             hands in marriage to any but real republicans,” a group of New Jersey
             Republicans asserted. A Philadelphia paper toasted “The fair Daughters
             of Columbia. May their smiles be the reward of Republicans only.”11
             Though unmistakably steeped in the gendered assumptions about female



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  177




sexuality and domesticity that denied women an equal share of the politi-      The artist James
                                                                               Peale painted
cal rights men enjoyed, these statements also conceded the pivotal role        this portrait of
women played as active participants in partisan politics.12                    his wife, Mary,
                                                                               and five of their
                                                                               eventual six chil-
IV. Jefferson as President                                                     dren. Peale and
                                                                               others represented
                                                                               women as respon-
Buttressed by robust public support, Jefferson sought to implement policies    sible for the health
that reflected his own political ideology. He worked to reduce taxes and       of the republic
                                                                               through their roles
cut the government’s budget, believing that this would expand the eco-         as wives as moth-
nomic opportunities of free Americans. His cuts included national defense,     ers. Historians
and Jefferson restricted the regular army to three thousand men. England       call this view of
                                                                               women Republi-
may have needed taxes and debt to support its military empire, but Jef-        can Motherhood.
ferson was determined to live in peace—and that belief led him to reduce       Wikimedia.

America’s national debt while getting rid of all internal taxes during his
first term. In a move that became the crowning achievement of his presi-
dency, Jefferson authorized the acquisition of Louisiana from France in
1803 in what is considered the largest real estate deal in American history.
France had ceded Louisiana to Spain in exchange for West Florida after the
Seven Years’ War decades earlier. Jefferson was concerned about American
access to New Orleans, which served as an important port for western
farmers. His worries multiplied when the French secretly reacquired Loui-
siana in 1800. Spain remained in Louisiana for two more years while the



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
178                                                                                 chap ter 7




Thomas Jefferson’s   U.S. minister to France, Robert R. Livingston, tried to strike a compro-
victory over John
Adams in the elec-
                     mise. Fortunately for the United States, the pressures of war in Europe and
tion of 1800 was     the slave insurrection in Haiti forced Napoleon to rethink his vast North
celebrated through   American holdings. Rebellious slaves coupled with a yellow fever outbreak
everyday Ameri-
cans’ material       in Haiti defeated French forces, stripping Napoleon of his ability to control
culture, including   Haiti (the home of profitable sugar plantations). Deciding to cut his losses,
this victory ban-
ner. Smithsonian     Napoleon offered to sell the entire Louisiana Territory for $15 ­million—
Institution, Na-     roughly equivalent to $250 million today. Negotiations between Livingston
tional Museum of
American History.
                     and Napoleon’s foreign minister, Talleyrand, succeeded more spectacularly
                     than either Jefferson or Livingston could have imagined.
                         Jefferson made an inquiry to his cabinet regarding the constitutional-
                     ity of the Louisiana Purchase, but he believed he was obliged to operate
                     outside the strict limitations of the Constitution if the good of the nation
                     was at stake, as his ultimate responsibility was to the American people.
                     Jefferson felt he should be able to “throw himself on the justice of his
                     country” when he facilitated the interests of the very people he served.13



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  179


    Jefferson’s foreign policy, particularly the Embargo Act of 1807, elic-
ited the most outrage from his Federalist critics. As Napoleon Bonapar-
te’s armies moved across Europe, Jefferson wrote to a European friend
that he was glad that God had “divided the dry lands of your hemisphere
from the dry lands of ours, and said ‘here, at least, be there peace.’”14 Un-
fortunately, the Atlantic Ocean soon became the site of Jefferson’s great-
est foreign policy test, as England, France, and Spain refused to respect
American ships’ neutrality. The greatest offenses came from the British,
who resumed the policy of impressment, seizing thousands of American
sailors and forcing them to fight for the British navy.
    Many Americans called for war when the British attacked the USS
                                                                                 The attack of
Chesapeake in 1807. The president, however, decided on a policy of               the Chesapeake
“peaceable coercion” and Congress agreed. Under the Embargo Act of               caused such furor
                                                                                 in the hearts of
1807, American ports were closed to all foreign trade in hopes of avoid-         Americans that
ing war. Jefferson hoped that an embargo would force European nations            even eighty years
                                                                                 after the incident,
to respect American neutrality. Historians disagree over the wisdom of           an artist sketched
peaceable coercion. At first, withholding commerce rather than declaring         this drawing of
                                                                                 the event. Fred
war appeared to be the ultimate means of nonviolent conflict resolution.
                                                                                 S. Cozzens, The
In practice, the embargo hurt the U.S. economy. Even Jefferson’s personal        incident between
finances suffered. When Americans resorted to smuggling their goods out          HMS “Leop-
                                                                                 ard” and USS
of the country, Jefferson expanded governmental powers to try to enforce         “Chesapeake”
their compliance, leading some to label him a “tyrant.”                          that sparked the
                                                                                 Chesapeake-Leop-
    Criticism of Jefferson’s policies reflected the same rhetoric his support-   ard Affair, 1897.
ers had used earlier against Adams and the Federalists. Federalists attacked     Wikimedia.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
180                                                                          chap ter 7


             the American Philosophical Society and the study of natural history, be-
             lieving both to be too saturated with Democratic Republicans. Some Fed-
             eralists lamented the alleged decline of educational standards for children.
             Moreover, James Callender published accusations (that were later proven
             credible by DNA evidence) that Jefferson was involved in a sexual relation-
             ship with Sally Hemings, one of his slaves.15 Callender referred to Jeffer-
             son as “our little mulatto president,” suggesting that sex with a slave had
             somehow compromised Jefferson’s racial integrity.16 Callender’s accusa-
             tion joined previous Federalist attacks on Jefferson’s racial politics, includ-
             ing a scathing pamphlet written by South Carolinian William Loughton
             Smith in 1796 that described the principles of Jeffersonian democracy as
             the beginning of a slippery slope to dangerous racial equality.17
                 Arguments lamenting the democratization of America were far less
             effective than those that borrowed from democratic language and al-
             leged that Jefferson’s actions undermined the sovereignty of the people.
             When Federalists attacked Jefferson, they often accused him of acting
             against the interests of the very public he claimed to serve. This tactic
             represented a pivotal development. As the Federalists scrambled to stay
             politically relevant, it became apparent that their ideology—rooted in
             eighteenth-century notions of virtue, paternalistic rule by wealthy elite,
             and the deference of ordinary citizens to an aristocracy of merit—was no
             longer tenable. The Federalists’ adoption of republican political rhetoric
             signaled a new political landscape in which both parties embraced the
             direct involvement of the citizenry. The Republican Party rose to power
             on the promise to expand voting and promote a more direct link between
             political leaders and the electorate. The American populace continued to
             demand more direct access to political power. Jefferson, James Madison,
             and James Monroe sought to expand voting through policies that made it
             easier for Americans to purchase land. Under their leadership, seven new
             states entered the Union. By 1824, only three states still had rules about
             how much property someone had to own before he could vote. Never
             again would the Federalists regain dominance over either Congress or
             the presidency; the last Federalist to run for president, Rufus King, lost
             to Monroe in 1816.


             V. Native American Power and the United States
             The Jeffersonian rhetoric of equality contrasted harshly with the reality
             of a nation stratified along the lines of gender, class, race, and ethnic-



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  181


ity. Diplomatic relations between Native Americans and local, state, and
national governments offer a dramatic example of the dangers of those
inequalities. Prior to the Revolution, many Indian nations had balanced
a delicate diplomacy between European empires, which scholars have
called the Play-off System.18 Moreover, in many parts of North America,
indigenous peoples dominated social relations.
    Americans pushed for more land in all their interactions with Na-
tive diplomats and leaders. But boundaries were only one source of ten-
sion. Trade, criminal jurisdiction, roads, the sale of liquor, and alliances
were also key negotiating points. Despite their role in fighting on both
sides, Native American negotiators were not included in the diplomatic
negotiations that ended the Revolutionary War. Unsurprisingly, the final
document omitted concessions for Native allies. Even as Native peoples
proved vital trading partners, scouts, and allies against hostile nations,
they were often condemned by white settlers and government officials
as “savages.” White ridicule of indigenous practices and disregard for
indigenous nations’ property rights and sovereignty prompted some in-
digenous peoples to turn away from white practices.
    In the wake of the American Revolution, Native American diplomats
developed relationships with the United States, maintained or ceased re-
lations with the British Empire (or with Spain in the South), and nego-
tiated their relationship with other Native nations. Formal diplomatic
negotiations included Native rituals to reestablish relationships and open
communication. Treaty conferences took place in Native towns, at neu-
tral sites in Indian-American borderlands, and in state and federal capi-
tals. While chiefs were politically important, skilled orators, such as Red
Jacket, as well as intermediaries, and interpreters also played key roles
in negotiations. Native American orators were known for metaphorical
language, command of an audience, and compelling voice and gestures.
    Throughout the early republic, diplomacy was preferred to war. Vio-
lence and warfare carried enormous costs for all parties—in lives, money,
trade disruptions, and reputation. Diplomacy allowed parties to air their
grievances, negotiate their relationships, and minimize violence. Violent
conflicts arose when diplomacy failed.
    Native diplomacy testified to the complexity of indigenous cultures
and their role in shaping the politics and policy of American communi-
ties, states, and the federal government. Yet white attitudes, words, and
policies frequently relegated Native peoples to the literal and figurative
margins as “ignorant savages.” Poor treatment like this inspired hostility



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
182                                                                                  chap ter 7




Shown in this portrait as a refined gentle-
man, Red Jacket proved to be one of the
most effective middlemen between Native
Americans and U.S. officials. The medal
worn around his neck, apparently given
to him by George Washington, reflects
his position as an intermediary. Camp-
bell & Burns, Red Jacket. Seneca war
chief, Philadelphia: C. Hullmandel, 1838.
Library of Congress.


                       and calls for pan-Indian alliances from leaders of distinct Native nations,
                       including the Shawnee leader Tecumseh.
                           Tecumseh and his brother, Tenskwatawa, the Prophet, helped envi-
                       sion an alliance of North America’s indigenous populations to halt the
                       encroachments of the United States. They created pan-Indian towns in
                       present-day Indiana, first at Greenville, then at Prophetstown, in defiance
                       of the Treaty of Greenville (1795). Tecumseh traveled to many diverse In-
                       dian nations from Canada to Georgia, calling for unification, resistance,
                       and the restoration of sacred power.
                           Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa’s pan-Indian confederacy was the cul-
                       mination of many movements that swept through indigenous North
                       America during the eighteenth century. An earlier coalition fought in
                       Pontiac’s War. Neolin, the Delaware prophet, influenced Pontiac, an Ot-
                       tawa (Odawa) war chief, with his vision of Native independence, cul-
                       tural renewal, and religious revitalization. Through Neolin, the Master
                       of Life—the Great Spirit—urged Native peoples to shrug off their de-
                       pendency on European goods and technologies, reassert their faith in
                       Native spirituality and rituals, and cooperate with one another against



                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  183


the “White people’s ways and nature.”19 Additionally, Neolin advocated
violence against British encroachments on Indian lands, which escalated
after the Seven Years’ War. His message was particularly effective in the
Ohio and Upper Susquehanna Valleys, where polyglot communities of in-
digenous refugees and migrants from across eastern North America lived
together. When combined with the militant leadership of Pontiac, who
took up Neolin’s message, the many Native peoples of the region united
in attacks against British forts and people. From 1763 until 1765, the
Great Lakes, Ohio Valley, and Upper Susquehanna Valley areas were em-
broiled in a war between Pontiac’s confederacy and the British Empire, a
war that ultimately forced the English to restructure how they managed
Native-British relations and trade.
    In the interim between 1765 and 1811, other Native prophets kept
Neolin’s message alive while encouraging indigenous peoples to resist
Euro-American encroachments. These individuals included the Ottawa
leader “the Trout,” also called Maya-Ga-Wy; Joseph Brant of the Iro-
quois (Haudenosaunee); the Creek headman Mad Dog; Painted Pole of
the Shawnee; a Mohawk woman named Coocoochee; Main Poc of the
Potawatomi; and the Seneca prophet Handsome Lake. Once again, the
epicenter of this pan-Indian resistance and revitalization originated in the
Ohio Valley and Great Lakes regions, where from 1791 to 1795 a joint
force of Shawnee, Delaware, Miami, Iroquois, Ojibwe, Ottawa, Huron,
Potawatomi, Mingo, Chickamauga, and other indigenous peoples waged
war against the American republic. Although this “Western Confeder-
acy” ultimately suffered defeat at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794,
this Native coalition achieved a number of military victories against
the republic, including the destruction of two American armies, forcing
President Washington to reformulate federal Indian policy. Tecumseh’s
experiences as a warrior against the American military in this conflict
probably influenced his later efforts to generate solidarity among North
American indigenous communities.
    Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa articulated ideas and beliefs similar to
their eighteenth-century predecessors. In particular, Tenskwatawa pro-
nounced that the Master of Life entrusted him and Tecumseh with the
responsibility for returning Native peoples to the one true path and to
rid Native communities of the dangerous and corrupting influences of
Euro-American trade and culture. Tenskwatawa stressed the need for
cultural and religious renewal, which coincided with his blending of the
tenets, traditions, and rituals of indigenous religions and Christianity. In



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
184                                                                                 chap ter 7




Tenskwatawa          particular, Tenskwatawa emphasized apocalyptic visions that he and his
as painted by
George Catlin,
                     followers would usher in a new world and restore Native power to the
in 1831. Catlin      continent. For Native peoples who gravitated to the Shawnee brothers,
acknowledged the     this emphasis on cultural and religious revitalization was empowering
prophet’s spiri-
tual power and       and spiritually liberating, especially given the continuous American as-
painted him with     saults on Native land and power in the early nineteenth century.
a medicine stick.
Wikimedia.               Tecumseh’s confederacy drew heavily from indigenous communities
                     in the Old Northwest and the festering hatred for land-hungry Ameri-
                     cans. Tecumseh attracted a wealth of allies in his adamant refusal to con-
                     cede any more land. Tecumseh proclaimed that the Master of Life tasked
                     him with the responsibility of returning Native lands to their rightful
                     owners. In his efforts to promote unity among Native peoples, Tecumseh
                     also offered these communities a distinctly “Indian identity” that brought
                     disparate Native peoples together under the banner of a common spiri-
                     tuality, together resisting an oppressive force. In short, spirituality tied
                     together the resistance movement. Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa were not
                     above using this pan-Indian rhetoric to legitimate their own authority
                     within indigenous communities at the expense of other Native leaders.
                     This manifested most visibly during Tenskwatawa’s witch hunts of the
                     1800s. Those who opposed Tenskwatawa or sought to accommodate
                     Americans were labeled witches.

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  185


    While Tecumseh attracted Native peoples from around the Northwest
and some from the Southeast, the Red Stick Creeks brought these ideas to
the Southeast. Led by the Creek prophet Hillis Hadjo, who accompanied
Tecumseh when he toured throughout the Southeast in 1811, the Red
Sticks integrated certain religious tenets from the north and invented new
religious practices specific to the Creeks, all the while communicating
and coordinating with Tecumseh after he left Creek Country. In doing
so, the Red Sticks joined Tecumseh in his resistance movement while
seeking to purge Creek society of its Euro-American dependencies. Creek
leaders who maintained relationships with the United States, in contrast,
believed that accommodation and diplomacy might stave off American
encroachments better than violence.
    Additionally, the Red Sticks discovered that most southeastern indig-
enous leaders cared little for Tecumseh’s confederacy. This lack of allies
hindered the spread of a pan-Indian movement in the southeast, and the
Red Sticks soon found themselves in a civil war against other Creeks. Te-
cumseh thus found little support in the Southeast beyond the Red Sticks,
who by 1813 were cut off from the North by Andrew Jackson. Shortly
thereafter, Jackson’s forces were joined by Lower Creek and Cherokee
forces that helped defeat the Red Sticks, culminating in Jackson’s vic-
tory at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. Following their defeat, the Red
Sticks were forced to cede an unprecedented fourteen million acres of
land in the Treaty of Fort Jackson. As historian Adam Rothman argues,
the defeat of the Red Sticks allowed the United States to expand west of
the Mississippi, guaranteeing the continued existence and profitability of
slavery.20
    Many Native leaders refused to join Tecumseh and instead main-
tained their loyalties to the American republic. After the failures of pan-
Indian unity and loss at the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811, Tecumseh’s
confederation floundered. The War of 1812 between the United States
and Britain offered new opportunities for Tecumseh and his followers.21
With the United States distracted, Tecumseh and his confederated army
seized several American forts on their own initiative. Eventually Tecum-
seh solicited British aid after sustaining heavy losses from American fight-
ers at Fort Wayne and Fort Harrison. Even then, the confederacy faced an
uphill battle, particularly after American naval forces secured control of
the Great Lakes in September 1813, forcing British ships and reinforce-
ments to retreat. Yet Tecumseh and his Native allies fought on despite
being surrounded by American forces. Tecumseh told the British com-
mander Henry Proctor, “Our lives are in the hands of the Great Spirit.

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
186                                                                         chap ter 7


             We are determined to defend our lands, and if it is his will, we wish to
             leave our bones upon them.”22 Not soon thereafter, Tecumseh fell on the
             battlefields of Moraviantown, Ontario, in October 1813. His death dealt
             a severe blow to pan-Indian resistance against the United States. Men like
             Tecumseh and Pontiac, however, left behind a legacy of pan-Indian unity
             that was not soon forgotten.


             VI. The War of 1812
             Soon after Jefferson retired from the presidency in 1808, Congress ended
             the embargo and the British relaxed their policies toward American ships.
             Despite the embargo’s unpopularity, Jefferson still believed that more
             time would have proven that peaceable coercion worked. Yet war with
             Britain loomed—a war that would galvanize the young American nation.
                 The War of 1812 stemmed from American entanglement in two dis-
             tinct sets of international issues. The first had to do with the nation’s de-
             sire to maintain its position as a neutral trading nation during the series
             of Anglo-French wars, which began in the aftermath of the French Revo-
             lution in 1793. The second had older roots in the colonial and Revolu-
             tionary era. In both cases, American interests conflicted with those of the
             British Empire. British leaders showed little interest in accommodating
             the Americans.
                 Impressments, the practice of forcing American sailors to join the
             British Navy, was among the most important sources of conflict between
             the two nations. Driven in part by trade with Europe, the American
             economy grew quickly during the first decade of the nineteenth century,
             creating a labor shortage in the American shipping industry. In response,
             pay rates for sailors increased and American captains recruited heavily
             from the ranks of British sailors. As a result, around 30 percent of sailors
             employed on American merchant ships were British. As a republic, the
             Americans advanced the notion that people could become citizens by
             renouncing their allegiance to their home nation. To the British, a person
             born in the British Empire was a subject of that empire for life, a status
             they could not change. The British Navy was embroiled in a difficult
             war and was unwilling to lose any of its labor force. In order to regain
             lost crewmen, the British often boarded American ships to reclaim their
             sailors. Of course, many American sailors found themselves caught up
             in these sweeps and “impressed” into the service of the British Navy.
             Between 1803 and 1812, some six thousand Americans suffered this fate.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  187


The British would release Americans who could prove their identity, but
this process could take years while the sailor endured harsh conditions
and the dangers of the Royal Navy.
    In 1806, responding to a French declaration of a complete naval
blockade of Great Britain, the British demanded that neutral ships first
carry their goods to Britain to pay a transit duty before they could pro-
ceed to France. Despite loopholes in these policies between 1807 and
1812, Britain, France, and their allies seized about nine hundred Ameri-
can ships, prompting a swift and angry American response. Jefferson’s
embargo sent the nation into a deep depression and drove exports down
from $108 million in 1807 to $22 million in 1808, all while having little
effect on Europeans.23 Within fifteen months Congress repealed the Em-
bargo Act, replacing it with smaller restrictions on trade with Britain and
France. Although efforts to stand against Great Britain had failed, resent-
ment of British trade policy remained widespread.
    Far from the Atlantic Ocean on the American frontier, Americans
were also at odds with the British Empire. From their position in Canada,
the British maintained relations with Native Americans in the Old North-
west, supplying them with goods and weapons in attempts to maintain
ties in case of another war with the United States. The threat of a Native
uprising increased after 1805 when Tenskwatawa and Tecumseh built
their alliance. The territorial governor of Illinois, William Henry Har-
rison, eventually convinced the Madison administration to allow for
military action against the Native Americans in the Ohio Valley. The
resulting Battle of Tippecanoe drove the followers of the Prophet from
their gathering place but did little to change the dynamics of the region.
British efforts to arm and supply Native Americans, however, angered
Americans and strengthened anti-British sentiments.
    Republicans began to talk of war as a solution to these problems,
arguing that it was necessary to complete the War for Independence by
preventing British efforts to keep America subjugated at sea and on land.
The war would also represent another battle against the Loyalists, some
thirty-eight thousand of whom had populated Upper Canada after the
Revolution and sought to establish a counter to the radical experiment
of the United States.24
    In 1812, the Republicans held 75 percent of the seats in the House
and 82 percent of the Senate, giving them a free hand to set national pol-
icy. Among them were the “War Hawks,” whom one historian describes
as “too young to remember the horrors of the American Revolution” and



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
188                                                                         chap ter 7


             thus “willing to risk another British war to vindicate the nation’s rights
             and independence.”25 This group included men who would remain influ-
             ential long after the War of 1812, such as Henry Clay of Kentucky and
             John C. Calhoun of South Carolina.
                  Convinced by the War Hawks in his party, Madison drafted a state-
             ment of the nation’s disputes with the British and asked Congress for a
             war declaration on June 1, 1812. The Republicans hoped that an inva-
             sion of Canada might remove the British from their backyard and force
             the empire to change their naval policies. After much negotiation in Con-
             gress over the details of the bill, Madison signed a declaration of war on
             June 18, 1812. For the second time, the United States was at war with
             Great Britain.
                  While the War of 1812 contained two key players—the United States
             and Great Britain—it also drew in other groups, such as Tecumseh and
             the Indian Confederacy. The war can be organized into three stages or
             theaters. The first, the Atlantic Theater, lasted until the spring of 1813.
             During this time, Great Britain was chiefly occupied in Europe against
             Napoleon, and the United States invaded Canada and sent their fledgling
             navy against British ships. During the second stage, from early 1813 to
             1814, the United States launched their second offensive against Canada
             and the Great Lakes. In this period, the Americans won their first suc-
             cesses. The third stage, the Southern Theater, concluded with Andrew
             Jackson’s January 1815 victory outside New Orleans, Louisiana.
                  During the war, the Americans were greatly interested in Canada and
             the Great Lakes borderlands. In July 1812, the United States launched their
             first offensive against Canada. By August, however, the British and their al-
             lies rebuffed the Americans, costing the United States control over Detroit
             and parts of the Michigan Territory. By the close of 1813, the Americans
             recaptured Detroit, shattered the Indian Confederacy, killed Tecumseh,
             and eliminated the British threat in that theater. Despite these accomplish-
             ments, the American land forces proved outmatched by their adversaries.
                  After the land campaign of 1812 failed to secure America’s war aims,
             Americans turned to the infant navy in 1813. Privateers and the U.S.
             Navy rallied behind the slogan “Free Trade and Sailors’ Rights!” Al-
             though the British possessed the most powerful navy in the world, sur-
             prisingly the young American navy extracted early victories with larger,
             more heavily armed ships. By 1814, however, the major naval battles had
             been fought with little effect on the war’s outcome.
                  With Britain’s main naval fleet fighting in the Napoleonic Wars,
             smaller ships and armaments stationed in North America were generally

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  189




As pictured in this 1812 political cartoon published in Philadelphia, Americans lambasted the British and
their native allies for what they considered “savage” offenses during war, though Americans too were en-
gaging in such heinous acts. William Charles, A scene on the frontiers as practiced by the “humane” British
and their “worthy” allies, Philadelphia, 1812. Library of Congress.



no match for their American counterparts. Early on, Americans humili-
ated the British in single ship battles. In retaliation, Captain Philip Broke
of the HMS Shannon attacked the USS Chesapeake, captained by James
Lawrence, on June 1, 1813. Within six minutes, the Chesapeake was
destroyed and Lawrence mortally wounded. Yet the Americans did not
give up as Lawrence commanded them, “Tell the men to fire faster! Don’t
give up the ship!”26 Lawrence died of his wounds three days later, and al-
though the Shannon defeated the Chesapeake, Lawrence’s words became
a rallying cry for the Americans.
    Two and a half months later the USS Constitution squared off with the
HMS Guerriere. As the Guerriere tried to outmaneuver the Americans,
the Constitution pulled along broadside and began hammering the British
frigate. The Guerriere returned fire, but as one sailor observed, the can-
nonballs simply bounced off the Constitution’s thick hull. “­Huzzah! Her
sides are made of iron!” shouted the sailor, and henceforth, the Constitu-
tion became known as “Old Ironsides.” In less than thirty-five m     ­ inutes,

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
190                                                                                 chap ter 7


                     the Guerriere was so badly damaged that it was set aflame rather than
                     taken as a prize.
                         In 1814, Americans gained naval victories on Lake Champlain near
                     Plattsburgh, preventing a British land invasion of the United States and
                     on the Chesapeake Bay at Fort McHenry in Baltimore. Fort McHenry
                     repelled the nineteen-ship British fleet, enduring twenty-seven hours of
                     bombardment virtually unscathed. Watching from aboard a British ship,
                     American poet Francis Scott Key penned the verses of what would be-
                     come the national anthem, “The Star Spangled Banner.”
                         Impressive though these accomplishments were, they belied what was
                     actually a poorly executed military campaign against the British. The
                     U.S. Navy won their most significant victories in the Atlantic Ocean in
                     1813. Napoleon’s defeat in early 1814, however, allowed the British to
The artist shows
                     focus on North America and blockade American ports. Thanks to the
Washington, D.C.,
engulfed in flames   blockade, the British were able to burn Washington, D.C., on August
as the British       24, 1814 and open a new theater of operations in the South. The British
troops set fire to
the city in 1813.    sailed for New Orleans, where they achieved a naval victory at Lake Bor-
Capture of the       gne before losing the land invasion to Major General Andrew Jackson’s
City of Washing-
ton, August 1814.
                     troops in January 1815. This American victory actually came after the
Wikimedia.           United States and the United Kingdom signed the Treaty of Ghent on




               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  191


December 24, 1814, but the Battle of New Orleans proved to be a psy-           Contemplating
chological victory that boosted American morale and affected how the           the possibility of
                                                                               secession over
war has been remembered.                                                       the War of 1812
    But not all Americans supported the war. In 1814, New England Fed-         (fueled in large
                                                                               part by the eco-
eralists met in Hartford, Connecticut, to try to end the war and curb the      nomic interests
power of the Republican Party. They produced a document that pro-              of New England
                                                                               merchants), the
posed abolishing the three-fifths rule that afforded southern slaveholders
                                                                               Hartford Conven-
disproportionate representation in Congress, limiting the president to a       tion posed the
single term in office, and most importantly, demanding a two-thirds con-       possibility of
                                                                               disaster for the
gressional majority, rather than a simple majority, for legislation that de-   still-young United
clared war, admitted new states into the Union, or regulated commerce.         States. England,
                                                                               represented by the
With the two-thirds majority, New England’s Federalist politicians be-         figure John Bull
lieved they could limit the power of their political foes.                     on the right side,
                                                                               is shown in this
    These proposals were sent to Washington, but unfortunately for the
                                                                               political cartoon
Federalists, the victory at New Orleans buoyed popular support for             with arms open to
the Madison administration. With little evidence, newspapers accused           accept New Eng-
                                                                               land back into its
the Hartford Convention’s delegates of plotting secession. The episode         empire. William
demonstrated the waning power of Federalism and the need for the re-           Charles Jr., The
                                                                               Hartford Conven-
gion’s politicians to shed their aristocratic and Anglophile image. The        tion or Leap No
next New England politician to assume the presidency, John Quincy              Leap. Wikimedia.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
192                                                                         chap ter 7


             Adams, would, in 1824, emerge not from within the Federalist fold but
             having served as secretary of state under President James Monroe, the
             leader of the Virginia Republicans.
                  The Treaty of Ghent essentially returned relations between the United
             States and Britain to their prewar status. The war, however, mattered po-
             litically and strengthened American nationalism. During the war, Ameri-
             cans read patriotic newspaper stories, sang patriotic songs, and bought
             consumer goods decorated with national emblems. They also heard sto-
             ries about how the British and their Native allies threatened to bring
             violence into American homes. For examples, rumors spread that British
             officers promised rewards of “beauty and booty” for their soldiers when
             they attacked New Orleans.27 In the Great Lakes borderlands, wartime
             propaganda fueled Americans’ fear of Britain’s Native American allies,
             whom they believed would slaughter men, women, and children indis-
             criminately. Terror and love worked together to make American citizens
             feel a stronger bond with their country. Because the war mostly cut off
             America’s trade with Europe, it also encouraged Americans to see them-
             selves as different and separate; it fostered a sense that the country had
             been reborn.
                  Former treasury secretary Albert Gallatin claimed that the War of
             1812 revived “national feelings” that had dwindled after the Revolu-
             tion. “The people,” he wrote, were now “more American; they feel and
             act more like a nation.”28 Politicians proposed measures to reinforce the
             fragile Union through capitalism and built on these sentiments of nation-
             alism. The United States continued to expand into Indian territories with
             westward settlement in far-flung new states like Tennessee, Ohio, Missis-
             sippi, and Illinois. Between 1810 and 1830, the country added more than
             six thousand new post offices.
                  In 1817, South Carolina congressman John C. Calhoun called for
             building projects to “bind the republic together with a perfect system of
             roads and canals.”29 He joined with other politicians, such as Kentucky’s
             powerful Henry Clay, to promote what came to be called an American
             System. They aimed to make America economically independent and en-
             couraged commerce between the states over trade with Europe and the
             West Indies. The American System would include a new Bank of the
             United States to provide capital; a high protective tariff, which would
             raise the prices of imported goods and help American-made products
             compete; and a network of “internal improvements,” roads and canals
             to let people take American goods to market.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  193


     These projects were controversial. Many people believed that they
were unconstitutional or would increase the federal government’s power
at the expense of the states. Even Calhoun later changed his mind and
joined the opposition. The War of 1812, however, had reinforced Ameri-
cans’ sense of the nation’s importance in their political and economic
life. Even when the federal government did not act, states created banks,
roads, and canals of their own.
     What may have been the boldest declaration of America’s postwar
pride came in 1823. President James Monroe issued an ultimatum to the
empires of Europe in order to support several wars of independence in
Latin America. The Monroe Doctrine declared that the United States con-
sidered its entire hemisphere, both North and South America, off-­limits
to new European colonization. Although Monroe was a Jeffersonian,
some of his principles echoed Federalist policies. Whereas Jefferson cut
the size of the military and ended all internal taxes in his first term, Mon-
roe advocated the need for a strong military and an aggressive foreign
policy. Since Americans were spreading out over the continent, Monroe
authorized the federal government to invest in canals and roads, which
he said would “shorten distances and, by making each part more acces-
sible to and dependent on the other . . . shall bind the Union more closely
together.”30 As Federalists had attempted two decades earlier, Republican
leaders after the War of 1812 advocated strengthening the government to
strengthen the nation.


VII. Conclusion
Monroe’s election after the conclusion of the War of 1812 signaled the
death knell of the Federalists. Some predicted an “era of good feelings”
and an end to party divisions. The War had cultivated a profound sense
of union among a diverse and divided people. Yet that “era of good feel-
ings” would never really come. Political division continued. Though the
dying Federalists would fade from political relevance, a schism within the
Republican Party would give rise to Jacksonian Democrats. Political lim-
its continued along class, gender, and racial and ethnic lines. At the same
time, industrialization and the development of American capitalism re-
quired new justifications of inequality. Social change and increased immi-
gration prompted nativist reactions that would divide “true” Americans
from dangerous or undeserving “others.” Still, a cacophony of voices
clamored to be heard and struggled to realize a social order compatible



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
194                                                                            chap ter 7


             with the ideals of equality and individual liberty. As always, the meaning
             of democracy was in flux.


             VIII. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Nathaniel C. Green, with content contributions by
             Justin Clark, Adam Costanzo, Stephanie Gamble, Dale Kretz, Julie Richter, Bryan
             Rindfleisch, Angela Riotto, James Risk, Cara Rogers, Jonathan Wilfred Wilson,
             and Charlton Yingling.
                 Recommended citation: Justin Clark et al., “The Early Republic,” Nathan-
             iel C. Green, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright
             (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

             N o tes t o C h a p ter 7
                 1. Thomas Paine, Common Sense (1776), in Eric Foner, ed., Thomas Paine:
             Collected Writings (New York: Library of America, 1995), 23.
                 2. David Walker, Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World, But in Par-
             ticular, and Very Expressly, to Those of The United States of America (New
             York: Hill and Wang, 1995), 21, 56.
                 3. John Russwurm, “The Condition and Prospects of Hayti,” in African
             Americans and the Haitian Revolution: Selected Essays and Historical Docu-
             ments, ed. Maurice Jackson and Jacqueline Bacon (New York: Routledge, 2013),
             168.
                 4. “Republic of Hayti,” Colored American, March 15, 1838, 2.
                 5. Benjamin Rush, “Observations Intended to Favour a Supposition That the
             Black Color (As It Is Called) of the Negroes is Derived from the Leprosy,” Trans-
             actions of the American Philosophical Society 4 (1799): 289–297.
                 6. Banneker to Jefferson, August 19, 1791, Founders Online, National Ar-
             chives, http://​founders​.archives​.gov/​documents/​Jefferson/​01​-22​-02​-0049.
                 7. Fisher Ames, “The Mire of a Democracy,” in W. B. Allen, ed., Works of
             Fisher Ames, 2 vols. (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1984), Vol. 1: 6,7.
                 8. Jefferson to John Garland Jefferson, January 25, 1810, in The Papers of
             Thomas Jefferson, Retirement Series, ed. Julian P. Boyd et al., 40 vols. to date
             (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1950–), Vol. 2: 183. Hereafter cited
             as PTJ, RS.
                 9. Thomas Jefferson to Spencer Roane, September 6, 1819, http://​www​.loc​
             .gov/​exhibits/​jefferson/​137​.html.
                 10. Philadelphia Independent Gazetteer, June 5, 1787, in Merrill Jensen,
             John P. Kaminski, Gaspare J. Saladino, et al., eds., The Documentary History of
             the Ratification of the Constitution, 22 vols. to date (Madison: State Historical
             Society of Wisconsin, 1976–), Vol. 13: 126–127. The digital edition of the first
             twenty volumes is available through the University of Virginia Press Rotunda
             project, edited by John P. Kaminski, Gaspare J. Saladino, et al., http://​rotunda​
             .upress​.virginia​.edu/​founders/​RNCN​.html. Hereafter cited as DHRC.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  195


     11. Alexandria Times, and District of Columbia Daily Advertiser (Alexan-
dria, VA), July 2, 1800; Constitutional Telegraphe (Boston, MA), February 15
and December 6, 1800; Carlisle Gazette (Carlisle, PA), November 6, 1799.
     12. See Linda K. Kerber, Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in
Revolutionary America (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997);
and Mary Kelley, Learning to Stand and Speak: Women, Education, and Public
Life in America’s Republic (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006).
     13. Jefferson to John B. Colvin, September 20, 1810, in PTJ, RS 3: 99,
100, 101.
     14. Jefferson to the Earl of Buchan Washington, July 10, 1803, in Papers of
Thomas Jefferson, Volume 40 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013),
708–709.
     15. For the Hemings controversy and the DNA evidence, see Annette Gor-
don-Reed, Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy
(Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1997).
     16. Recorder (Richmond, VA), November 3, 1802.
     17. The Pretensions of Thomas Jefferson to the Presidency Examined; and
the Charges Against John Adams Refuted. Addressed to the Citizens of America
in General; and Particularly to the Electors of the President, 2 vols. (Philadelphia:
s.n., 1796).
     18. See, for example, Anthony F. C. Wallace, The Death and Rebirth of the
Seneca (New York: Random House, 1969), 111.
     19. Gregory Dowd, A Spirited Resistance: The North American Indian Strug-
gle for Unity, 1745–1815 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992), 33.
     20. Adam Rothman, Slave Country: American Expansion and the Origins of
the Deep South (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
     21. Nicole Eustace, 1812: War and the Passions of Patriotism (Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2012), 149–153.
     22. Quoted in Edward Eggleston and Elizabeth Eggleston Seelye, Tecumseh
and the Shawnee Prophet (New York: Dodd, Mead, 1878), 309.
     23. Amanda Porterfield, Conceived in Doubt: Religion and Politics in the
New American Nation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 187.
     24. Alan Taylor, The Civil War of 1812: American Citizens, British Subjects,
Irish Rebels, and Indian Allies (New York: Random House, 2010), 5.
     25. Donald R. Hickey, Glorious Victory: Andrew Jackson and the Battle of
New Orleans (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015), 8.
     26. “Martin Bibbings, “The Battle,” in Tim Voelcker, ed., Broke of the Shan-
non: And the War of 1812 (London: Seaworth Publishing, 2013), 138.
     27. Ronald L. Drez, The War of 1812: Conflict and Deception (Baton Rouge:
LSU Press, 2014), 154.
     28. Morton Keller, America’s Three Regimes: A New Political History: A
New Political History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 69.
     29. Brian Balogh, A Government Out of Sight: The Mystery of National Au-
thority in Nineteenth-Century America (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2009), 130.



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
196                                                                            chap ter 7


                 30. “Inaugural Address, March 4, 1817,” in Stanislaus Murray Hamilton,
             ed., The Writings of James Monroe (New York: Putnam, 1902), Vol. 6: 11.

             R e c o mmen d e d R e a din g
             Appleby, Joyce. Liberalism and Republicanism in the Historical Imagination.
                 Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1992.
             Bailey, Jeremy D. Thomas Jefferson and Executive Power. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
                 bridge University Press, 2010.
             Blackhawk, Ned. Violence over the Land: Indians and Empires in the Early
                 American West. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008.
             Bradburn, Douglas. The Citizenship Revolution: Politics and the Creation of the
                 American Union, 1774–1804. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
                 2009.
             Cleves, Rachel Hope. The Reign of Terror in America: Visions of Violence from
                 Anti-Jacobinism to Antislavery. New York: Cambridge University Press,
                 2009.
             Dubois, Laurent. Avengers of the New World: The Story of the Haitian Revolu-
                 tion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005.
             Edmunds, R. David. The Shawnee Prophet. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
                 Press, 1983.
             Eustace, Nicole. 1812: War and the Passions of Patriotism. Philadelphia: Univer-
                 sity of Pennsylvania Press, 2012.
             Fabian, Ann. The Skull Collectors: Race, Science, and America’s Unburied Dead.
                 Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
             Freeman, Joanne B. Affairs of Honor: National Politics in the New Republic.
                 New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001.
             Furstenberg, François. In the Name of the Father: Washington’s Legacy, Slavery,
                 and the Making of a Nation. New York: Penguin, 2006.
             Kastor, Peter J. The Nation’s Crucible: The Louisiana Purchase and the Creation
                 of America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004.
             Kelley, Mary. Learning to Stand and Speak: Women, Education, and Public Life
                 in America’s Republic. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
             Kerber, Linda. Federalists in Dissent: Imagery and Ideology in Jeffersonian Amer-
                 ica. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1970.
             _________. Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary
                 America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997.
             Lewis, Jan. The Pursuit of Happiness: Family and Values in Jefferson’s Virginia.
                 New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
             Manion, Jen. Liberty’s Prisoners: Carceral Culture in Early America. Philadel-
                 phia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015.
             Onuf, Peter. Jefferson’s Empire: The Language of American Nationhood. Char-
                 lottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2000.
             Porterfield, Amanda. Conceived in Doubt: Religion and Politics in the New
                 American Nation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T h e E a r l y R e p u bl i c  197


Rothman, Adam. Slave Country: American Expansion and the Origins of the
    Deep South. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009.
Rothman, Joshua D. Notorious in the Neighborhood: Sex and Families Across
    the Color Line in Virginia, 1787–1861. Chapel Hill: University of North Car-
    olina Press, 2003.
Sidbury, James. Ploughshares into Swords: Race, Rebellion, and Identity in Ga-
    briel’s Virginia, 1730–1810. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
    1997.
Smith-Rosenberg, Carroll. This Violent Empire: The Birth of an American Na-
    tional Identity. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012.
Taylor, Alan. The Civil War of 1812: American Citizens, British Subjects, Irish
    Rebels, and Indian Allies. New York: Random House, 2010.
Waldstreicher, David. In the Midst of Perpetual Fetes: The Making of American
    Nationalism 1776–1820. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
    1997.




          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
8
The Market Revolution

I. Introduction
In the early years of the nineteenth century, Americans’ endless com-         William James
                                                                              Bennett, View of
mercial ambition—what one Baltimore paper in 1815 called an “almost           South Street, from
universal ambition to get forward”—remade the nation.1 Between the            Maiden Lane,
Revolution and the Civil War, an old subsistence world died and a new         New York City, c.
                                                                              1827. Metropoli-
more-commercial nation was born. Americans integrated the technolo-           tan Museum of
gies of the Industrial Revolution into a new commercial economy. Steam        New York.

power, the technology that moved steamboats and railroads, fueled the
rise of American industry by powering mills and sparking new national
transportation networks. A “market revolution” remade the nation.
    The revolution reverberated across the country. More and more
farmers grew crops for profit, not self-sufficiency. Vast factories and
cities arose in the North. Enormous fortunes materialized. A new mid-
dle class ballooned. And as more men and women worked in the cash


             © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                      Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  199


economy, they were freed from the bound dependence of servitude.
But there were costs to this revolution. As northern textile factories
boomed, the demand for southern cotton swelled, and American slav-
ery accelerated. Northern subsistence farmers became laborers bound
to the whims of markets and bosses. The market revolution sparked
explosive economic growth and new personal wealth, but it also cre-
ated a growing lower class of property-less workers and a series of
devastating depressions, called “panics.” Many Americans labored
for low wages and became trapped in endless cycles of poverty. Some
workers, often immigrant women, worked thirteen hours a day, six
days a week. Others labored in slavery. Massive northern textile mills
turned southern cotton into cheap cloth. And although northern states
washed their hands of slavery, their factories fueled the demand for
slave-grown southern cotton and their banks provided the financing
that ensured the profitability and continued existence of the American
slave system. And so, as the economy advanced, the market revolution
wrenched the United States in new directions as it became a nation of
free labor and slavery, of wealth and inequality, and of endless promise
and untold perils.


II. Early Republic Economic Development
The growth of the American economy reshaped American life in the
decades before the Civil War. Americans increasingly produced goods
for sale, not for consumption. Improved transportation enabled a larger
exchange network. Labor-saving technology improved efficiency and
enabled the separation of the public and domestic spheres. The market
revolution fulfilled the revolutionary generation’s expectations of prog-
ress but introduced troubling new trends. Class conflict, child labor,
accelerated immigration, and the expansion of slavery followed. These
strains required new family arrangements and transformed American
cities.
    American commerce had proceeded haltingly during the eighteenth
century. American farmers increasingly exported foodstuffs to Europe as
the French Revolutionary Wars devastated the continent between 1793
and 1815. America’s exports rose in value from $20.2 million in 1790
to $108.3 million by 1807.2 But while exports rose, exorbitant internal
transportation costs hindered substantial economic development within
the United States. In 1816, for instance, $9 could move one ton of goods
across the Atlantic Ocean, but only thirty miles across land. An 1816

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
200                                                                                  chap ter 8


                      Senate Committee Report lamented that “the price of land carriage is
                      too great” to allow the profitable production of American manufactures.
                      But in the wake of the War of 1812, Americans rushed to build a new
                      national infrastructure, new networks of roads, canals, and railroads. In
                      his 1815 annual message to Congress, President James Madison stressed
                      “the great importance of establishing throughout our country the roads
                      and canals which can best be executed under national authority.”3 State
                      governments continued to sponsor the greatest improvements in Ameri-
                      can transportation, but the federal government’s annual expenditures on
                      internal improvements climbed to a yearly average of $1,323,000 by An-
                      drew Jackson’s presidency.4
                          State legislatures meanwhile pumped capital into the economy by
                      chartering banks. The number of state-chartered banks skyrocketed from
                      1 in 1783, 266 in 1820, and 702 in 1840 to 1,371 in 1860.5 European
Clyde Osmer           capital also helped build American infrastructure. By 1844, one British
DeLand, The First     traveler declared that “the prosperity of America, her railroads, canals,
Locomotive. Aug.
8th, 1829. Trial      steam navigation, and banks, are the fruit of English capital.”6
Trip of the “Stour-       Economic growth, however, proceeded unevenly. Depressions devas-
bridge Lion,”
1916. Library of
                      tated the economy in 1819, 1837, and 1857. Each followed rampant
Congress.             speculation in various commodities: land in 1819, land and slaves in




                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  201


1837, and railroad bonds in 1857. Eventually the bubbles all burst. The
spread of paper currency untethered the economy from the physical sig-
nifiers of wealth familiar to the colonial generation, namely land. Coun-
terfeit bills were endemic during this early period of banking. With so
many fake bills circulating, Americans were constantly on the lookout for
the “confidence man” and other deceptive characters in the urban land-
scape. Prostitutes and con men could look like regular honest Americans.
Advice literature offered young men and women strategies for avoiding
hypocrisy in an attempt to restore the social fiber. Intimacy in the domes-
tic sphere became more important as duplicity proliferated in the public
sphere. Fear of the confidence man, counterfeit bills, and a pending bust
created anxiety in the new capitalist economy. But Americans refused to
blame the logic of their new commercial system for these depressions.
Instead, they kept pushing “to get forward.”
    The so-called Transportation Revolution opened the vast lands west
of the Appalachian Mountains. In 1810, before the rapid explosion of
American infrastructure, Margaret Dwight left New Haven, Connecticut,
in a wagon headed for Ohio Territory. Her trip was less than five hundred
miles but took six weeks to complete. The journey was a terrible ordeal,
she said. The roads were “so rocky & so gullied as to be almost impass-
able.”7 Ten days into the journey, at Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, Dwight
said “it appeared to me that we had come to the end of the habitable part
of the globe.” She finally concluded that “the reason so few are willing to
return from the Western country, is not that the country is so good, but
because the journey is so bad.”8 Nineteen years later, in 1829, English
traveler Frances Trollope made the reverse journey across the Allegheny
Mountains from Cincinnati to the East Coast. At Wheeling, Virginia, her
coach encountered the National Road, the first federally funded interstate
infrastructure project. The road was smooth and her journey across the
Alleghenies was a scenic delight. “I really can hardly conceive a higher
enjoyment than a botanical tour among the Alleghany Mountains,” she
declared. The ninety miles of the National Road was to her “a garden.”9
    If the two decades between Margaret Dwight’s and Frances Trollope’s
journeys transformed the young nation, the pace of change only acceler-
ated in the following years. If a transportation revolution began with im-
proved road networks, it soon incorporated even greater improvements
in the ways people and goods moved across the landscape.
    New York State completed the Erie Canal in 1825. The 350-mile-long
human-made waterway linked the Great Lakes with the Hudson River



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
202                                                                                  chap ter 8




Engraving based       and the Atlantic Ocean. Soon crops grown in the Great Lakes region
on W. H. Bartlett,
Lockport, Erie
                      were carried by water to eastern cities, and goods from emerging eastern
Canal, 1839.          factories made the reverse journey to midwestern farmers. The success of
Wikimedia.            New York’s “artificial river” launched a canal-building boom. By 1840
                      Ohio created two navigable, all-water links from Lake Erie to the Ohio
                      River.
                          Robert Fulton established the first commercial steamboat service
                      up and down the Hudson River in New York in 1807. Soon thereafter
                      steamboats filled the waters of the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers. Down-
                      stream-only routes became watery two-way highways. By 1830, more
                      than two hundred steamboats moved up and down western rivers.
                          The United States’ first long-distance rail line launched from Mary-
                      land in 1827. Baltimore’s city government and the state government of
                      Maryland provided half the start-up funds for the new Baltimore & Ohio
                      (B&O) Rail Road Company. The B&O’s founders imagined the line as a
                      means to funnel the agricultural products of the trans-Appalachian West
                      to an outlet on the Chesapeake Bay. Similar motivations led citizens in
                      Philadelphia, Boston, New York City, and Charleston, South Carolina
                      to launch their own rail lines. State and local governments provided the
                      means for the bulk of this initial wave of railroad construction, but eco-



                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  203


nomic collapse following the Panic of 1837 made governments wary of
such investments. Government supports continued throughout the cen-
tury, but decades later the public origins of railroads were all but forgot-
ten, and the railroad corporation became the most visible embodiment of
corporate capitalism.
    By 1860 Americans had laid more than thirty thousand miles of rail-
roads.10 The ensuing web of rail, roads, and canals meant that few farmers
in the Northeast or Midwest had trouble getting goods to urban markets.
Railroad development was slower in the South, but there a combination of
rail lines and navigable rivers meant that few cotton planters struggled to
transport their products to textile mills in the Northeast and in England.
    Such internal improvements not only spread goods, they spread infor-
mation. The transportation revolution was followed by a communications
revolution. The telegraph redefined the limits of human communication.
By 1843 Samuel Morse had persuaded Congress to fund a forty-mile
telegraph line stretching from Washington, D.C., to Baltimore. Within a
few short years, during the Mexican-American War, telegraph lines car-
ried news of battlefield events to eastern newspapers within days. This
contrasts starkly with the War of 1812, when the Battle of New Orleans
took place nearly two full weeks after Britain and the United States had
signed a peace treaty.
    The consequences of the transportation and communication revolu-
tions reshaped the lives of Americans. Farmers who previously produced
crops mostly for their own family now turned to the market. They earned
cash for what they had previously consumed; they purchased the goods
they had previously made or went without. Market-based farmers soon
accessed credit through eastern banks, which provided them with the
opportunity to expand their enterprise but left also them prone before
the risk of catastrophic failure wrought by distant market forces. In the
Northeast and Midwest, where farm labor was ever in short supply, am-
bitious farmers invested in new technologies that promised to increase
the productivity of the limited labor supply. The years between 1815
and 1850 witnessed an explosion of patents on agricultural technolo-
gies. The most famous of these, perhaps, was Cyrus McCormick’s horse-
drawn mechanical reaper, which partially mechanized wheat harvesting,
and John Deere’s steel-bladed plow, which more easily allowed for the
conversion of unbroken ground into fertile farmland.
    Most visibly, the market revolution encouraged the growth of cities
and reshaped the lives of urban workers. In 1820, only New York had



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
204                                                                                  chap ter 8




A. Janicke &          over one hundred thousand inhabitants. By 1850, six American cities met
Co., Our City,
                      that threshold, including Chicago, which had been founded fewer than
(St. Louis, Mo.),
1859. Library of      two decades earlier.11 New technology and infrastructure paved the way
Congress.             for such growth. The Erie Canal captured the bulk of the trade emerging
                      from the Great Lakes region, securing New York City’s position as the
                      nation’s largest and most economically important city. The steamboat
                      turned St. Louis and Cincinnati into centers of trade, and Chicago rose
                      as it became the railroad hub of the western Great Lakes and Great Plains
                      regions. The geographic center of the nation shifted westward. The devel-
                      opment of steam power and the exploitation of Pennsylvania coalfields
                      shifted the locus of American manufacturing. By the 1830s, for instance,
                      New England was losing its competitive advantage to the West.
                          Meanwhile, the cash economy eclipsed the old, local, informal sys-
                      tems of barter and trade. Income became the measure of economic worth.
                      Productivity and efficiencies paled before the measure of income. Cash
                      facilitated new impersonal economic relationships and formalized new
                      means of production. Young workers might simply earn wages, for in-
                      stance, rather than receiving room and board and training as part of ap-
                      prenticeships. Moreover, a new form of economic organization appeared:
                      the business corporation.



                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  205


    States offered the privileges of incorporation to protect the fortunes
and liabilities of entrepreneurs who invested in early industrial endeav-
ors. A corporate charter allowed investors and directors to avoid per-
sonal liability for company debts. The legal status of incorporation had
been designed to confer privileges to organizations embarking on expen-
sive projects explicitly designed for the public good, such as universities,
municipalities, and major public works projects. The business corpora-
tion was something new. Many Americans distrusted these new, imper-
sonal business organizations whose officers lacked personal responsibility
while nevertheless carrying legal rights. Many wanted limits. Thomas Jef-
ferson himself wrote in 1816 that “I hope we shall crush in its birth the
aristocracy of our monied corporations which dare already to challenge
our government to a trial of strength, and bid defiance to the laws of our
country.”12 But in Dartmouth v. Woodward (1819) the Supreme Court
upheld the rights of private corporations when it denied the attempt of
the government of New Hampshire to reorganize Dartmouth College on
behalf of the common good. Still, suspicions remained. A group of jour-
neymen cordwainers in New Jersey publically declared in 1835 that they
“entirely disapprov[ed] of the incorporation of Companies, for carrying
on manual mechanical business, inasmuch as we believe their tendency is
to eventuate and produce monopolies, thereby crippling the energies of
individual enterprise.”13


III. The Decline of Northern Slavery and
the Rise of the Cotton Kingdom
Slave labor helped fuel the market revolution. By 1832, textile com-
panies made up 88 out of 106 American corporations valued at over
$100,000.14 These textile mills, worked by free labor, nevertheless de-
 pended on southern cotton, and the vast new market economy spurred
 the expansion of the plantation South.
     By the early nineteenth century, states north of the Mason-Dixon
 Line had taken steps to abolish slavery. Vermont included abolition as
 a provision of its 1777 state constitution. Pennsylvania’s emancipation
 act of 1780 stipulated that freed children must serve an indenture term
 of twenty-eight years. Gradualism brought emancipation while also
­defending the interests of northern masters and controlling still another
 generation of black Americans. In 1804 New Jersey became the last of
 the northern states to adopt gradual emancipation plans. There was no



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
206                                                                         chap ter 8


             immediate moment of jubilee, as many northern states only promised to
             liberate future children born to enslaved mothers. Such laws also stipu-
             lated that such children remain in indentured servitude to their m­ other’s
             master in order to compensate the slaveholder’s loss. James Mars, a
             young man indentured under this system in Connecticut, risked being
             thrown in jail when he protested the arrangement that kept him bound
             to his mother’s master until age twenty-five.15
                 Quicker routes to freedom included escape or direct emancipation
             by masters. But escape was dangerous and voluntary manumission rare.
             Congress, for instance, made the harboring of a fugitive slave a federal
             crime as early as 1793. Hopes for manumission were even slimmer, as few
             northern slaveholders emancipated their own slaves. Roughly one fifth of
             the white families in New York City owned slaves, and fewer than eighty
             slaveholders in the city voluntarily manumitted slaves between 1783 and
             1800. By 1830, census data suggests that at least 3,500 people were still
             enslaved in the North. Elderly Connecticut slaves remained in bondage as
             late as 1848, and in New Jersey slavery endured until after the Civil War.16
                 Emancipation proceeded slowly, but proceeded nonetheless. A free
             black population of fewer than 60,000 in 1790 increased to more than
             186,000 by 1810. Growing free black communities fought for their civil
             rights. In a number of New England locales, free African Americans
             could vote and send their children to public schools. Most northern states
             granted black citizens property rights and trial by jury. African Ameri-
             cans owned land and businesses, founded mutual aid societies, estab-
             lished churches, promoted education, developed print culture, and voted.
                 Nationally, however, the slave population continued to grow, from
             less than 700,000 in 1790 to more than 1.5 million by 1820.17 The
             growth of abolition in the North and the acceleration of slavery in the
             South created growing divisions. Cotton drove the process more than
             any other crop. Eli Whitney’s cotton gin, a simple hand-cranked device
             designed to mechanically remove sticky green seeds from short staple
             cotton, allowed southern planters to dramatically expand cotton produc-
             tion for the national and international markets. Water-powered textile
             factories in England and the American Northeast rapidly turned raw cot-
             ton into cloth. Technology increased both the supply of and demand for
             cotton. White southerners responded by expanding cultivation farther
             west, to the Mississippi River and beyond. Slavery had been growing less
             profitable in tobacco-planting regions like Virginia, but the growth of
             cotton farther south and west increased the demand for human bondage.
             Eager cotton planters invested their new profits in new slaves.

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  207




    The cotton boom fueled speculation in slavery. Many slave owners            Sidney & Neff, de-
                                                                                tail from Plan of
leveraged potential profits into loans used to purchase ever increasing         the City of Low-
numbers of slaves. For example, one 1840 Louisiana Courier ad warned,           ell, Massachusetts,
“it is very difficult now to find persons willing to buy slaves from Missis-    1850. Wikimedia
                                                                                Commons.
sippi or Alabama on account of the fears entertained that such property
may be already mortgaged to the banks of the above named states.”18
    New national and international markets fueled the plantation boom.
American cotton exports rose from 150,000 bales in 1815 to 4,541,000
bales in 1859. The Census Bureau’s 1860 Census of Manufactures stated
that “the manufacture of cotton constitutes the most striking feature of
the industrial history of the last fifty years.”19 Slave owners shipped their
cotton north to textile manufacturers and to northern financers for over-
seas shipments. Northern insurance brokers and exporters in the North-
east profited greatly.
    While the United States ended its legal participation in the global slave
trade in 1808, slave traders moved one million slaves from the tobacco-
producing Upper South to cotton fields in the Lower South between 1790
and 1860.20 This harrowing trade in human flesh supported middle-class
occupations in the North and South: bankers, doctors, lawyers, insur-
ance brokers, and shipping agents all profited. And of course it facilitated
the expansion of northeastern textile mills.


IV. Changes in Labor Organization
While industrialization bypassed most of the American South, south-
ern cotton production nevertheless nurtured industrialization in the
­Northeast and Midwest. The drive to produce cloth transformed the

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
208                                                                         chap ter 8


             American ­system of labor. In the early republic, laborers in manufacturing
             might typically have been expected to work at every stage of production.
             But a new system, piecework, divided much of production into discrete
             steps performed by different workers. In this new system, merchants or
             investors sent or “put out” materials to individuals and families to com-
             plete at home. These independent laborers then turned over the partially
             finished goods to the owner to be given to another laborer to finish.
                 As early as the 1790s, however, merchants in New England began
             experimenting with machines to replace the putting-out system. To ef-
             fect this transition, merchants and factory owners relied on the theft of
             British technological knowledge to build the machines they needed. In
             1789, for instance, a textile mill in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, contracted
             twenty-one-year-old British immigrant Samuel Slater to build a yarn-
             spinning machine and then a carding machine. Slater had apprenticed
             in an English mill and succeeded in mimicking the English machinery.
             The fruits of American industrial espionage peaked in 1813 when Fran-
             cis Cabot Lowell and Paul Moody re-created the powered loom used in
             the mills of Manchester, England. Lowell had spent two years in Britain
             observing and touring mills in England. He committed the design of the
             powered loom to memory so that, no matter how many times British cus-
             toms officials searched his luggage, he could smuggle England’s industrial
             know-how into New England.
                 Lowell’s contribution to American industrialism was not only tech-
             nological, it was organizational. He helped reorganize and centralize the
             American manufacturing process. A new approach, the Waltham-Lowell
             System, created the textile mill that defined antebellum New England
             and American industrialism before the Civil War. The modern Ameri-
             can textile mill was fully realized in the planned mill town of Lowell in
             1821, four years after Lowell himself died. Powered by the Merrimack
             River in northern Massachusetts and operated by local farm girls, the
             mills of Lowell centralized the process of textile manufacturing under
             one roof. The modern American factory was born. Soon ten thousand
             workers labored in Lowell alone. Sarah Rice, who worked at the nearby
             Millbury factory, found it “a noisy place” that was “more confined than
             I like to be.”21 Working conditions were harsh for the many desperate
             “mill girls” who operated the factories relentlessly from sunup to sun-
             down. One worker complained that “a large class of females are, and
             have been, destined to a state of servitude.”22 Female workers went on
             strike. They lobbied for better working hours. But the lure of wages was



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  209




too much. As another worker noted, “very many Ladies . . . have given          Winslow Homer,
                                                                               “Bell-Time,”
up millinery, dressmaking & school keeping for work in the mill.”23 With       Harper’s Weekly,
a large supply of eager workers, Lowell’s vision brought a rush of capital     vol. 12 (July
and entrepreneurs into New England. The first American manufacturing           1868): 472.
                                                                               Wikimedia.
boom was under way.
    The market revolution shook other industries as well. Craftsmen
began to understand that new markets increased the demand for their
products. Some shoemakers, for instance, abandoned the traditional
method of producing custom-built shoes at their home workshops and
instead began producing larger quantities of shoes in ready-made sizes to
be shipped to urban centers. Manufacturers wanting increased produc-
tion abandoned the old personal approach of relying on a single live-in
apprentice for labor and instead hired unskilled wage laborers who did
not have to be trained in all aspects of making shoes but could simply be
assigned a single repeatable aspect of the task. Factories slowly replaced
shops. The old paternalistic apprentice system, which involved long-term
obligations between apprentice and master, gave way to a more imper-
sonal and more flexible labor system in which unskilled laborers could
be hired and fired as the market dictated. A writer in the New York



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
210                                                                         chap ter 8


             Observer in 1826 complained, “The master no longer lives among his
             apprentices [and] watches over their moral as well as mechanical im-
             provement.”24 Masters-turned-employers now not only had fewer obli-
              gations to their workers, they had a lesser attachment. They no longer
              shared the bonds of their trade but were subsumed under new class-based
              relationships: employers and employees, bosses and workers, capitalists
              and laborers. On the other hand, workers were freed from the long-term,
              paternalistic obligations of apprenticeship or the legal subjugation of in-
              dentured servitude. They could theoretically work when and where they
              wanted. When men or women made an agreement with an employer to
              work for wages, they were “left free to apportion among themselves their
              respective shares, untrammeled . . . by unwise laws,” as Reverend Alonzo
              Potter rosily proclaimed in 1840.25 But while the new labor system was
             celebrated throughout the northern United States as “free labor,” it was
             simultaneously lamented by a growing powerless class of laborers.
                  As the northern United States rushed headlong toward commercial-
             ization and an early capitalist economy, many Americans grew uneasy
             with the growing gap between wealthy businessmen and impoverished
             wage laborers. Elites like Daniel Webster might defend their wealth and
             privilege by insisting that all workers could achieve “a career of use-
             fulness and enterprise” if they were “industrious and sober,” but labor
             activist Seth Luther countered that capitalism created “a cruel system of
             extraction on the bodies and minds of the producing classes . . . for no
             other object than to enable the ‘rich’ to ‘take care of themselves’ while the
             poor must work or starve.”26
                  Americans embarked on their Industrial Revolution with the expec-
             tation that all men could start their careers as humble wage workers
             but later achieve positions of ownership and stability with hard work.
             Wage work had traditionally been looked down on as a state of depen-
             dence, suitable only as a temporary waypoint for young men without
             resources on their path toward the middle class and the economic success
             necessary to support a wife and children ensconced within the domestic
             sphere. Children’s magazines—such as Juvenile Miscellany and Parley’s
             ­Magazine—glorified the prospect of moving up the economic ladder. This
              “free labor ideology” provided many northerners with a keen sense of
              superiority over the slave economy of the southern states.27
                  But the commercial economy often failed in its promise of social mo-
              bility. Depressions and downturns might destroy businesses and reduce
              owners to wage work. Even in times of prosperity unskilled workers
              might perpetually lack good wages and economic security and therefore

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  211


had to forever depend on supplemental income from their wives and
young children.
    Wage workers—a population disproportionately composed of immi-
grants and poorer Americans—faced low wages, long hours, and danger-
ous working conditions. Class conflict developed. Instead of the formal
inequality of a master-servant contract, employer and employee entered
a contract presumably as equals. But hierarchy was evident: employers
had financial security and political power; employees faced uncertainty
and powerlessness in the workplace. Dependent on the whims of their
employers, some workers turned to strikes and unions to pool their re-
sources. In 1825 a group of journeymen in Boston formed a Carpenters’
Union to protest their inability “to maintain a family at the present time,
with the wages which are now usually given.”28 Working men organized
unions to assert themselves and win both the respect and the resources
due to a breadwinner and a citizen.
    For the middle-class managers and civic leaders caught between
workers and owners, unions enflamed a dangerous antagonism between
employers and employees. They countered any claims of inherent class
conflict with the ideology of social mobility. Middle-class owners and
managers justified their economic privilege as the natural product of supe-
rior character traits, including decision making and hard work. One group
of master carpenters denounced their striking journeymen in 1825 with
the claim that workers of “industrious and temperate habits, have, in their
turn, become thriving and respectable Masters, and the great body of our
Mechanics have been enabled to acquire property and respectability, with
a just weight and influence in society.”29 In an 1856 speech in Kalamazoo,
Michigan, Abraham Lincoln had to assure his audience that the country’s
commercial transformation had not reduced American laborers to slav-
ery. Southerners, he said, “insist that their slaves are far better off than
Northern freemen. What a mistaken view do these men have of Northern
labourers! They think that men are always to remain labourers here—
but there is no such class. The man who laboured for another last year,
this year labours for himself. And next year he will hire others to labour
for him.”30 This essential belief undergirded the northern commitment to
“free labor” and won the market revolution much widespread acceptance.


V. Changes in Gender Roles and Family Life
In the first half of the nineteenth century, families in the northern United
States increasingly participated in the cash economy created by the

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
212                                                                         chap ter 8


             ­ arket revolution. The first stirrings of industrialization shifted work
             m
             away from the home. These changes transformed Americans’ notions
             of what constituted work and therefore shifted what it meant to be an
             American woman and an American man. As Americans encountered
             more goods in stores and produced fewer at home, the ability to remove
             women and children from work determined a family’s class status. This
             ideal, of course, ignored the reality of women’s work at home and was
             possible for only the wealthy. The market revolution therefore not only
             transformed the economy, it changed the nature of the American family.
             As the market revolution thrust workers into new systems of production,
             it redefined gender roles. The market integrated families into a new cash
             economy. As Americans purchased more goods in stores and produced
             fewer at home, the purity of the domestic sphere—the idealized realm of
             women and children—increasingly signified a family’s class status.
                 Women and children worked to supplement the low wages of many
             male workers. Around age eleven or twelve, boys could take jobs as of-
             fice runners or waiters, earning perhaps a dollar a week to support their
             parents’ incomes. The ideal of an innocent and protected childhood was
             a privilege for middle- and upper-class families, who might look down
             upon poor families. Joseph Tuckerman, a Unitarian minister who served
             poor Bostonians, lamented the lack of discipline and regularity among
             poor children: “At one hour they are kept at work to procure fuel, or
             perform some other service; in the next are allowed to go where they
             will, and to do what they will.”31 Prevented from attending school, poor
             children served instead as economic assets for their destitute families.
                 Meanwhile, the education received by middle-class children provided
             a foundation for future economic privilege. As artisans lost control over
             their trades, young men had a greater incentive to invest time in educa-
             tion to find skilled positions later in life. Formal schooling was espe-
             cially important for young men who desired apprenticeships in retail or
             commercial work. Enterprising instructors established schools to assist
             “young gentlemen preparing for mercantile and other pursuits, who may
             wish for an education superior to that usually obtained in the common
             schools, but different from a college education, and better adapted to
             their particular business,” such as that organized in 1820 by Warren Col-
             burn of Boston.32 In response to this need, the Boston School Committee
             created the English High School (as opposed to the Latin School) that
             could “give a child an education that shall fit him for active life, and
             shall serve as a foundation for eminence in his profession, whether Mer-



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  213




                                                           “The Sphere of Woman,” Godey’s Lady’s
                                                           Book, vol. 40 (March 1850): 209. Univer-
                                                           sity of Virginia.



cantile or Mechanical” beyond that “which our public schools can now
furnish.”33
    Education equipped young women with the tools to live sophisticated,
genteel lives. After sixteen-year-old Elizabeth Davis left home in 1816
to attend school, her father explained that the experience would “lay a
foundation for your future character & respectability.”34 After touring
the United States in the 1830s, Alexis de Tocqueville praised the inde-
pendence granted to the young American woman, who had “the great
scene of the world . . . open to her” and whose education prepared her
to exercise both reason and moral sense.35 Middling young women also
used their education to take positions as schoolteachers in the expanding
common school system. Bristol Academy in Tauten, Maine, for instance,
advertised “instruction . . . in the art of teaching” for female pupils.36 In
1825, Nancy Denison left Concord Academy with references indicating
that she was “qualified to teach with success and profit” and “very cheer-
fully recommend[ed]” for “that very responsible employment.”37
    Middle-class youths found opportunities for respectable employment
through formal education, but poor youths remained in marginalized posi-
tions. Their families’ desperate financial state kept them from enjoying the
fruits of education. When pauper children did receive ­teaching through



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
214                                                                         chap ter 8


             institutions such the House of Refuge in New York City, they were often
             simultaneously indentured to successful families to serve as field hands
             or domestic laborers. The Society for the Reformation of Juvenile Delin-
             quents in New York City sent its wards to places like Sylvester Lusk’s farm
             in Enfield, Connecticut. Lusk took boys to learn “the trade and mystery of
             farming” and girls to learn “the trade and mystery of housewifery.” In ex-
             change for “sufficient Meat, Drink, Apparel, Lodging, and Washing, fitting
             for an Apprentice,” and a rudimentary education, the apprentices prom-
             ised obedience, morality, and loyalty.38 Poor children also found work in
             factories such as Samuel Slater’s textile mills in southern New England.
             Slater published a newspaper advertisement for “four or five active Lads,
             about 15 Years of Age to serve as Apprentices in the Cotton Factory.”39
                 And so, during the early nineteenth century, opportunities for educa-
             tion and employment often depended on a given family’s class. In co-
             lonial America, nearly all children worked within their parent’s chosen
             profession, whether it be agricultural or artisanal. During the market
             revolution, however, more children were able to postpone employment.
             Americans aspired to provide a “Romantic Childhood”—a period
             in which boys and girls were sheltered within the home and nurtured
             through primary schooling.40 This ideal was available to families that
             could survive without their children’s labor. As these children matured,
             their early experiences often determined whether they entered respect-
             able, well-paying positions or became dependent workers with little pros-
             pects for social mobility.
                 Just as children were expected to be sheltered from the adult world
             of work, American culture expected men and women to assume distinct
             gender roles as they prepared for marriage and family life. An ideology of
             “separate spheres” set the public realm—the world of economic produc-
             tion and political life—apart as a male domain, and the world of consum-
             ers and domestic life as a female one. (Even nonworking women labored
             by shopping for the household, producing food and clothing, cleaning,
             educating children, and performing similar activities. But these were con-
             sidered “domestic” because they did not bring money into the household,
             although they too were essential to the household’s economic viability.)
             While reality muddied the ideal, the divide between a private, female
             world of home and a public, male world of business defined American
             gender hierarchy.
                 The idea of separate spheres also displayed a distinct class bias. Mid-
             dle and upper classes reinforced their status by shielding “their” women



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  215


from the harsh realities of wage labor. Women were to be mothers and
educators, not partners in production. But lower-class women contin-
ued to contribute directly to the household economy. The middle- and
upper-class ideal was feasible only in households where women did not
need to engage in paid labor. In poorer households, women engaged in
wage labor as factory workers, pieceworkers producing items for mar-
ket consumption, tavern- and innkeepers, and domestic servants. While
many of the fundamental tasks women performed remained the same—
producing clothing, cultivating vegetables, overseeing dairy production,
and performing any number of other domestic labors—the key difference
was whether and when they performed these tasks for cash in a market
economy.
    Domestic expectations constantly changed and the market revolution
transformed many women’s traditional domestic tasks. Cloth production,
for instance, advanced throughout the market revolution as new mecha-
nized production increased the volume and variety of fabrics available
to ordinary people. This relieved many better-off women of a traditional
labor obligation. As cloth production became commercialized, women’s
home-based cloth production became less important to household econo-
mies. Purchasing cloth and, later, ready-made clothes began to transform
women from producers to consumers. One woman from Maine, Martha
Ballard, regularly referenced spinning, weaving, and knitting in the diary
she kept from 1785 to 1812.41 Martha, her daughters, and her female
neighbors spun and plied linen and woolen yarns and used them to pro-
duce a variety of fabrics to make clothing for her family. The production
of cloth and clothing was a year-round, labor-intensive process, but it
was for home consumption, not commercial markets.
    In cities, where women could buy cheap imported cloth to turn into
clothing, they became skilled consumers. They stewarded money earned
by their husbands by comparing values and haggling over prices. In one
typical experience, Mrs. Peter Simon, a captain’s wife, inspected twenty-
six yards of Holland cloth to ensure that it was worth the £130 price.42
Even wealthy women shopped for high-value goods. While servants or
slaves routinely made low-value purchases, the mistress of the household
trusted her discriminating eye alone for expensive or specific purchases.
    Women might also parlay their skills into businesses. In addition to
working as seamstresses, milliners, or laundresses, women might un-
dertake paid work for neighbors or acquaintances or combine cloth-
ing production with management of a boardinghouse. Even slaves with



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
216                                                                               chap ter 8




Thomas Horner,     ­ articular skill at producing clothing could be hired out for a higher price
                   p
Broadway, New
York, 1836.
                   or might even negotiate to work part-time for themselves. Most slaves,
Smithsonian        however, continued to produce domestic items, including simpler cloths
American Art       and clothing, for home consumption.
Museum.
                       Similar domestic expectations played out in the slave states. En-
                   slaved women labored in the fields. Whites argued that African American
                   women were less delicate and womanly than white women and there-
                   fore perfectly suited for agricultural labor. The southern ideal meanwhile
                   established that white plantation mistresses were shielded from manual
                   labor because of their very whiteness. Throughout the slave states, how-
                   ever, aside from the minority of plantations with dozens of slates, most
                   white women by necessity continued to assist with planting, harvesting,
                   and processing agricultural projects despite the cultural stigma attached
                   to it. White southerners continued to produce large portions of their food
                   and clothing at home. Even when they were market-oriented produc-
                   ers of cash crops, white southerners still insisted that their adherence to
                   plantation slavery and racial hierarchy made them morally superior to
                   greedy northerners and their callous, cutthroat commerce. Southerners
                   and northerners increasingly saw their ways of life as incompatible.
                       While the market revolution remade many women’s economic roles,
                   their legal status remained essentially unchanged. Upon marriage, women
                   were rendered legally dead by the notion of coverture, the custom that
                   counted married couples as a single unit represented by the husband.
                   Without special precautions or interventions, women could not earn



             © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                      Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  217


their own money, own their own property, sue, or be sued. Any money
earned or spent belonged by law to their husbands. Women shopped on
their husbands’ credit and at any time husbands could terminate their
wives’ access to their credit. Although a handful of states made divorce
available—divorce had before only been legal in Congregationalist states
such as Massachusetts and Connecticut, where marriage was strictly a
civil contract rather than a religious one—it remained extremely expen-
sive, difficult, and rare. Marriage was typically a permanently binding
legal contract.
     Ideas of marriage, if not the legal realities, began to change. This
period marked the beginning of the shift from “institutional” to “com-
panionate” marriage.43 Institutional marriages were primarily labor ar-
rangements that maximized the couple’s and their children’s chances of
surviving and thriving. Men and women assessed each other’s skills as
they related to household production, although looks and personality
certainly entered into the equation. But in the late eighteenth century,
under the influence of Enlightenment thought, young people began to
privilege character and compatibility in their potential partners. Money
was still essential: marriages prompted the largest redistributions of
property prior to the settling of estates at death. But the means of this
redistribution was changing. Especially in the North, land became a less
important foundation for matchmaking as wealthy young men became
not only farmers and merchants but bankers, clerks, or professionals.
The increased emphasis on affection and attraction that young people
embraced was facilitated by an increasingly complex economy that of-
fered new ways to store, move, and create wealth, which liberalized the
criteria by which families evaluated potential in-laws.
     To be considered a success in family life, a middle-class American
man typically aspired to own a comfortable home and to marry a woman
of strong morals and religious conviction who would take responsibil-
ity for raising virtuous, well-behaved children. The duties of the middle-
class husband and wife would be clearly delineated into separate spheres.
The husband alone was responsible for creating wealth and engaging
in the commerce and politics—the public sphere. The wife was respon-
sible for the private—keeping a good home, being careful with household
expenses, and raising children, inculcating them with the middle-class
virtues that would ensure their future success. But for poor families, sac-
rificing the potential economic contributions of wives and children was
an impossibility.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
218                                                                          chap ter 8



             VI. The Rise of Industrial Labor in Antebellum America
             More than five million immigrants arrived in the United States between
             1820 and 1860. Irish, German, and Jewish immigrants sought new lives
             and economic opportunities. By the Civil War, nearly one out of every
             eight Americans had been born outside the United States. A series of push
             and pull factors drew immigrants to the United States.
                  In England, an economic slump prompted Parliament to modernize
             British agriculture by revoking common land rights for Irish farmers.
             These policies generally targeted Catholics in the southern counties of
             Ireland and motivated many to seek greater opportunity elsewhere. The
             booming American economy pulled Irish immigrants toward ports along
             the eastern United States. Between 1820 and 1840, over 250,000 Irish
             immigrants arrived in the United States.44 Without the capital and skills
             required to purchase and operate farms, Irish immigrants settled primar-
             ily in northeastern cities and towns and performed unskilled work. Irish
             men usually emigrated alone and, when possible, practiced what became
             known as chain migration. Chain migration allowed Irish men to send
             portions of their wages home, which would then be used either to sup-
             port their families in Ireland or to purchase tickets for relatives to come to
             the United States. Irish immigration followed this pattern into the 1840s
             and 1850s, when the infamous Irish Famine sparked a massive exodus
             out of Ireland. Between 1840 and 1860, 1.7 million Irish fled starvation
             and the oppressive English policies that accompanied it.45 As they entered
             manual, unskilled labor positions in urban America’s dirtiest and most
             dangerous occupations, Irish workers in northern cities were compared
             to African Americans, and anti-immigrant newspapers portrayed them
             with apelike features. Despite hostility, Irish immigrants retained their
             social, cultural, and religious beliefs and left an indelible mark on Ameri-
             can culture.
                  While the Irish settled mostly in coastal cities, most German immi-
             grants used American ports and cities as temporary waypoints before
             settling in the rural countryside. Over 1.5 million immigrants from the
             various German states arrived in the United States during the antebellum
             era. Although some southern Germans fled declining agricultural con-
             ditions and repercussions of the failed revolutions of 1848, many Ger-
             mans simply sought steadier economic opportunity. German immigrants
             tended to travel as families and carried with them skills and capital that
             enabled them to enter middle-class trades. Germans migrated to the Old



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  219


Northwest to farm in rural areas and practiced trades in growing com-
munities such as St. Louis, Cincinnati, and Milwaukee, three cities that
formed what came to be called the German Triangle.
    Catholic and Jewish Germans transformed regions of the republic.
Although records are sparse, New York’s Jewish population rose from
approximately five hundred in 1825 to forty thousand in 1860.46 Simi-
lar gains were seen in other American cities. Jewish immigrants hailing
from southwestern Germany and parts of occupied Poland moved to
the United States through chain migration and as family units. Unlike
other Germans, Jewish immigrants rarely settled in rural areas. Once es-
tablished, Jewish immigrants found work in retail, commerce, and ar-
tisanal occupations such as tailoring. They quickly found their footing
and established themselves as an intrinsic part of the American market
economy. Just as Irish immigrants shaped the urban landscape through
the construction of churches and Catholic schools, Jewish immigrants
erected synagogues and made their mark on American culture.
    The sudden influx of immigration triggered a backlash among many
native-born Anglo-Protestant Americans. This nativist movement, espe-
cially fearful of the growing Catholic presence, sought to limit European
immigration and prevent Catholics from establishing churches and other
institutions. Popular in northern cities such as Boston, Chicago, Phila-
delphia, and other cities with large Catholic populations, nativism even
spawned its own political party in the 1850s. The American Party, more
commonly known as the Know-Nothing Party, found success in local
and state elections throughout the North. The party even nominated
candidates for president in 1852 and 1856. The rapid rise of the Know-
Nothings, reflecting widespread anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant senti-
ment, slowed European immigration. Immigration declined precipitously
after 1855 as nativism, the Crimean War, and improving economic con-
ditions in Europe discouraged potential migrants from traveling to the
United States. Only after the American Civil War would immigration lev-
els match and eventually surpass the levels seen in the 1840s and 1850s.
    In industrial northern cities, Irish immigrants swelled the ranks of the
working class and quickly encountered the politics of industrial labor.
Many workers formed trade unions during the early republic. Organiza-
tions such as Philadelphia’s Federal Society of Journeymen Cordwainers
or the Carpenters’ Union of Boston operated within specific industries
in major American cities. These unions worked to protect the economic
power of their members by creating closed shops—workplaces wherein



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
220                                                                                 chap ter 8




N. Currier, The      employers could only hire union members—and striking to improve
Propagation
                     working conditions. Political leaders denounced these organizations as
Society, More Free
Than Welcome,        unlawful combinations and conspiracies to promote the narrow self-­
1855. Library of     interest of workers above the rights of property holders and the interests
Congress.
                     of the common good. Unions did not become legally acceptable until
                     1842 when the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruled in favor of
                     a union organized among Boston bootmakers, arguing that the workers
                     were capable of acting “in such a manner as best to subserve their own
                     interests.”47 Even after the case, unions remained in a precarious legal
                     position.
                         In the 1840s, labor activists organized to limit working hours and
                     protect children in factories. The New England Association of Farm-
                     ers, Mechanics and Other Workingmen (NEA) mobilized to establish a
                     ten-hour workday across industries. They argued that the ten-hour day
                     would improve the immediate conditions of laborers by allowing “time
                     and opportunities for intellectual and moral improvement.”48 After
                     a citywide strike in Boston in 1835, the Ten-Hour Movement quickly
                     spread to other major cities such as Philadelphia. The campaign for lei-



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  221


sure time was part of the male working-class effort to expose the hollow-
ness of the paternalistic claims of employers and their rhetoric of moral
superiority.49
    Women, a dominant labor source for factories since the early 1800s,
launched some of the earliest strikes for better conditions. Textile op-
eratives in Lowell, Massachusetts, “turned out” (walked off) their jobs
in 1834 and 1836. During the Ten-Hour Movement of the 1840s, fe-
male operatives provided crucial support. Under the leadership of Sarah
Bagley, the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association organized petition
drives that drew thousands of signatures from “mill girls.” Like male
activists, Bagley and her associates used the desire for mental improve-
ment as a central argument for reform. An 1847 editorial in the Voice
of Industry, a labor newspaper published by Bagley, asked, “who, after
thirteen hours of steady application to monotonous work, can sit down
and apply her mind to deep and long continued thought?”50 Despite the
widespread support for a ten-hour day, the movement achieved only
partial success. President Martin Van Buren established a ten-hour-day
policy for laborers on federal public works projects. New Hampshire
passed a statewide law in 1847, and Pennsylvania followed a year later.
Both states, however, allowed workers to voluntarily consent to work
more than ten hours per day.
    In 1842, child labor became a dominant issue in the American
labor movement. The protection of child laborers gained more middle-
class support than the protection of adult workers. A petition from
parents in Fall River, a southern Massachusetts mill town that em-
ployed a high portion of child workers, asked the legislature for a law
“prohibiting the employment of children in manufacturing establish-
ments at an age and for a number of hours which must be permanently
injurious to their health and inconsistent with the education which is
essential to their welfare.”51 Massachusetts quickly passed a law pro-
hibiting children under age twelve from working more than ten hours
a day. By the midnineteenth century, every state in New England had
followed Massachusetts’s lead. Between the 1840s and 1860s, these
statutes slowly extended the age of protection of labor and the assur-
ance of schooling. Throughout the region, public officials agreed that
young children (between ages nine and twelve) should be prevented
from working in dangerous occupations, and older children (between
ages twelve and fifteen) should balance their labor with education and
time for leisure.52



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
222                                                                            chap ter 8


                 Male workers sought to improve their income and working conditions
             to create a household that kept women and children protected within
             the domestic sphere. But labor gains were limited, and the movement
             remained moderate. Despite its challenge to industrial working condi-
             tions, labor activism in antebellum America remained largely wedded to
             the free labor ideal. The labor movement later supported the northern
             free soil movement, which challenged the spread of slavery in the 1840s,
             simultaneously promoting the superiority of the northern system of com-
             merce over the southern institution of slavery while trying, much less
             successfully, to reform capitalism.


             VII. Conclusion
             During the early nineteenth century, southern agriculture produced by
             slaves fueled northern industry produced by wage workers and managed
             by the new middle class. New transportation, new machinery, and new
             organizations of labor integrated the previously isolated pockets of the
             colonial economy into a national industrial operation. Industrialization
             and the cash economy tied diverse regions together at the same time that
             ideology drove Americans apart. By celebrating the freedom of contract
             that distinguished the wage worker from the indentured servant of previ-
             ous generations or the slave in the southern cotton field, political leaders
             claimed the American Revolution’s legacy for the North. But the rise of
             industrial child labor, the demands of workers to unionize, the economic
             vulnerability of women, and the influx of non-Anglo immigrants left many
             Americans questioning the meaning of liberty after the market revolution.


             VIII. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Jane Fiegen Green, with content contributions by Kelly
             Arehart, Myles Beaurpre, Kristin Condotta, Jane Fiegen Green, Nathan Jeremie-
             Brink, Lindsay Keiter, Brenden Kennedy, William Kerrigan, Christopher Sawula,
             David Schley, and Evgenia Shayder Shoop.
                 Recommended citation: Kelly Arehart et al., “Market Revolution,” Jane Fie-
             gen Green, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright (Stan-
             ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

             Notes to Ch a p ter 8
                1. Niles’ Weekly Register (December 2, 1815), 238.
                2. Douglass C. North, Economic Growth in the United States, 1790–1860
             (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1961), 25.


       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  223


     3. James Madison, Annual Message to Congress, December 5, 1815.
     4. William L. Garrison and David M. Levinson, The Transportation Experi-
ence: Policy, Planning, and Deployment (New York: Oxford University Press,
2014), 51.
     5. Warren E. Weber, “Early State Banks in the United States: How Many
Were There and When Did They Exist?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
Quarterly Review 30, no. 1 (September 2006): 28–40.
     6. John Robert Godley, Letters from America (London: Murray, 1844), 267.
     7. Margaret Van Horn Dwight, A Journey to Ohio in 1810, ed. Max Farrand
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1912), 13.
     8. Ibid., 37.
     9. Frances Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans, Vol. 1 (London:
Whittaker, Treacher, 1832), 274.
     10. Cathy Matson and Wendy A. Woloson, Risky Business: Winning and
Losing in the Early American Economy, 1780–1850 (Philadelphia: Library Com-
pany of Philadelphia: 2003), 29.
     11. Leonard P. Curry, The Corporate City: The American City as a Political
Entity, 1800–1850 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1997), 46.
     12. Jefferson to George Logan, November 12, 1816, in Works of Thomas
Jefferson, ed. Paul Leicester Ford, Federal Edition, Vol. 12 (New York: 1904),
12–43.
     13. Quoted in Michael Zakim and Gary John Kornblith, eds., Capitalism
Takes Command: The Social Transformation of Nineteenth-Century America
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 158.
     14. Philip Scranton, Proprietary Capitalism: The Textile Manufacture at
Philadelphia, 1800–1885 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983), 12.
     15. Robert J. Cottrol, ed., From African to Yankee: Narratives of Slavery and
Freedom in Antebellum New England (Armonk, NY: Sharpe, 1998), 62.
     16. The 1830 census enumerates 3,568 enslaved people in the northern states
(Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont). 1830 U.S.
Census data taken from Minnesota Population Center, National Historical Geo-
graphic Information System: Version 2.0 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
2011), http://​www​.nhgis​.org; David Menschel, “Abolition Without Deliverance:
The Law of Connecticut Slavery 1784–1848,” Yale Law Journal 111, no. 1 (Oc-
tober 2001): 191; James J. Gigantino II, The Ragged Road to Abolition: Slavery
and Freedom in New Jersey 1775–1865 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 2015), 248.
     17. Minnesota Population Center. National Historical Geographic Informa-
tion System: Version 2.0.
     18. Louisiana Courier, February 12, 1840.
     19. U.S. Census Office 8th Census 1860 and James Madison Edmunds, Man-
ufactures of the United States in 1860: Compiled from the Original Returns of
the Eighth Census, Under the Direction of the Secretary of the Interior (Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1865).



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
224                                                                             chap ter 8


                  20. Ira Berlin, Generations of Captivity: A History of African-American
             Slaves (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2003), 168–169.
                  21. Sarah “Sally” Rice to her father, February 23, 1845, published in
             The New England Mill Village, 1790–1860 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982),
             390.
                  22. Factory Tracts: Factory Life as It Is, no. 1 (Lowell, MA: Female Labor
             Reform Association 1845), 4.
                  23. Malenda M. Edwards to Sabrina Bennett, April 4, 1839, quoted in
             Thomas Dublin, ed., Farm to Factory Women’s Letters, 1830–1860 (New York:
             Columbia University Press, 1993), 74.
                  24. “Apprentices No. 2,” New York Observer, October 14, 1826.
                  25. Reverend Alonzo Potter, Political Economy: Its Objects, Uses, and Prin-
             ciples (New York: Potter, 1840), 92.
                  26. Daniel Webster, “Lecture Before the Society for the Diffusion of Use-
             ful Knowledge,” in The Writings and Speeches of Daniel Webster: Writings and
             Speeches Hitherto Uncollected, vol. 1. Addresses on Various Occasions, ed. Ed-
             ward Everett (Boston: Little, Brown, 1903); Carl Siracusa, A Mechanical People:
             Perceptions of the Industrial Order in Massachusetts, 1815–1880 (Middletown,
             CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1979), 157.
                  27. Eric Foner, Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men : The Ideology of the Repub-
             lican Party Before the Civil War (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970).
                  28. “Notice to House Carpenters in the Country,” Columbian Centinel,
             April 23, 1825.
                  29. John R. Commons, ed., A Documentary History of American Industrial
             Society (New York: Russell and Russell, 1958), Vol. 6: 79.
                  30. Abraham Lincoln, Speech at Kalamazoo, Michigan, Aug. 27, 1856, in
             Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, Vol. 2 (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Uni-
             versity Press, 1953), 364.
                  31. Joseph Tuckerman, Mr. Tuckerman’s Eight Semiannual Report in His
             Service as a Minister at Large in Boston (Boston: Gray and Bowen, 1831), 21.
                  32. Warren Colburn, “Advertisement for Colburn’s school for young gentle-
             men preparing for mercantile and other pursuits, 19 Sep 1820,” Massachusetts
             Historical Society.
                  33. Proceedings of the School Committee, of the Town of Boston, respecting
             an English Classical School (Boston: The Committee, 1820).
                  34. William Davis to Elizabeth Davis, March 21, 1816; June 23, 1816; No-
             vember 17, 1816; Davis Family Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society.
                  35. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, Vol. II., ed. Phillips Brad-
             ley (New York: Knopf, 1945), 196.
                  36. A Catalogue of the Officers, Teachers, and Pupils in Bristol Academy
             (Tauton, MA: Bradford and Amsbury, 1837).
                  37. Nancy Denison recommendation, May 1825, Titus Orcott Brown Pa-
             pers, Maine Historical Society.
                  38. Indentures and Other Documents Binding Minor Wards of the Society
             for the Reformation of Juvenile Delinquents of the City of New York as appren-



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he M a r k e t R e v o l u ti o n  225


tices to Sylvester Lusk of Enfield, 1828–1838, Sylvester Lusk Papers, Connecticut
Historical Society.
     39. Advertisement in Providence Gazette, October 1794.
     40. Steven Mintz, Huck’s Raft: A History of American Childhood (Cam-
bridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2004).
     41. Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife’s Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard,
Based on Her Diary, 1785–1812 (New York: Knopf, 1990).
     42. Ellen Hartigan-O’Connor, The Ties That Buy: Women and Commerce
in Revolutionary America (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
2009), 138.
     43. Anya Jabour, Marriage in the Early Republic: Elizabeth and William
Wirt and the Companionate Ideal (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1998).
     44. Bill Ong Hing, Defining America Through Immigration Policy (Philadel-
phia: Temple University Press, 2004), 278–284.
     45. John Powell, Encyclopedia of North American Immigration (New York:
Facts on File, 2005), 154.
     46. H. B. Grinstein, The Rise of the Jewish Community in New York, 1654–
1860 (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1945), 469.
     47. Commonwealth v. Hunt, 45 Mass. 111 (1842).
     48. New England Artisan and Laboring Man’s Repository (Pawtucket, Prov-
 idence, and Boston), March 8, 1832.
     49. Teresa Anne Murphy, Ten Hours’ Labor: Religion, Reform, and Gender
in Early New England (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992).
     50. [Sarah Bagley], “The Blindness of the Age,” Voice of Industry, April 23,
1847.
     51. Legislative Documents, 1842, House, No. 4, p. 3, in Elizabeth Dabney
Langhorne Lewis Otey, The Beginnings of Child Labor Legislation in Certain
States: A Comparative Study (New York: Arno Press, 1974), 78.
     52. Miriam E. Loughran, “The Historical Development of Child-Labor
­Legislation in the United States,” PhD diss., Catholic University of America,
 1921, p. 67.

R e c omm e n d e d R e a di n g
Balleisen, Edward J. Navigating Failure: Bankruptcy and Commercial Society in
    Antebellum America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.
Blewett, Mary H. Men, Women, and Work: Class, Gender, and Protest in the
    New England Shoe Industry, 1780–1910. Urbana: University of Illinois
    Press, 1988.
Boydston, Jeanne. Home and Work: Housework, Wages, and the Ideology of
    Labor in the Early Republic. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Dublin, Thomas. Transforming Women’s Work: New England Lives in the In-
    dustrial Revolution. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994.
Faler, Paul G. Mechanics and Manufacturers in the Early Industrial Revolution:
    Lynn, Massachusetts, 1760–1860. Albany: SUNY Press, 1981.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
226                                                                          chap ter 8


             Foner, Eric. Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican
                 Party Before the Civil War. New York: Oxford University Press, 1970.
             Greenberg, Joshua R. Advocating the Man: Masculinity, Organized Labor, and
                 the Household in New York, 1800–1840. New York: Columbia University
                 Press, 2008.
             Halttunen, Karen. Confidence Men and Painted Women: A Study of Middle-
                 Class Culture in America, 1830–1870. Yale University Press, 1982.
             Hartigan-O’Connor, Ellen. The Ties That Buy: Women and Commerce in Revo-
                 lutionary America. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009.
             Howe, Daniel Walker. What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of Amer-
                 ica, 1815–1848. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
             Innes, Stephen, ed. Work and Labor in Early America. Chapel Hill: University of
                 North Carolina Press, 1988.
             Jabour, Anya. Marriage in the Early Republic: Elizabeth and William Wirt and
                 the Companionate Ideal. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998.
             Larson, John Lauritz. The Market Revolution in America: Liberty, Ambition,
                 and the Eclipse of the Common Good. New York: Cambridge University
                 Press, 2010.
             Levy, Jonathan. Freaks of Fortune: The Emerging World of Capitalism and Risk
                 in America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012.
             Luskey, Brian P. On the Make: Clerks and the Quest for Capital in Nineteenth-
                 Century America. New York: New York University Press, 2010.
             Matson, Cathy, and Wendy A. Woloson. Risky Business: Winning and Losing in
                 the Early American Economy, 1780–1850. Philadelphia: Library Company
                 of Philadelphia, 2003.
             McNeur, Catherine. Taming Manhattan: Environmental Battles in the Antebel-
                 lum City. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2014.
             Melish, Joanne Pope. Disowning Slavery: Gradual Emancipation and “Race” in
                 New England, 1780–1860. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998.
             Mihm, Stephen. A Nation of Counterfeiters: Capitalists, Con Men, and the Mak-
                 ing of the United States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009.
             Murphy, Teresa Anne. Ten Hours’ Labor: Religion, Reform, and Gender in Early
                 New England. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992.
             Rice, Stephen P. Minding the Machine: Languages of Class in Early Industrial
                 America. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004.
             Rothenberg, Winifred Barr. From Market-Places to a Market Economy: The
                 Transformation of Rural Massachusetts, 1750–1850. Chicago: University of
                 Chicago Press, 1992.
             Ryan, Mary P. Cradle of the Middle Class: The Family in Oneida County, New
                 York, 1790–1865. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
             Sellers, Charles Grier. The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815–1846.
                 New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
             Tucker, Barbara M. Samuel Slater and the Origins of the American Textile Indus-
                 try, 1790–1860. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1984.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
9
Democracy in America

I. Introduction
On May 30, 1806, Andrew Jackson, a thirty-nine-year-old Tennessee              George Caleb
                                                                               Bingham, The
lawyer, came within inches of death. A duelist’s bullet struck him in the      County Election,
chest, just shy of his heart (the man who fired the gun was purportedly        1852. Reynolda
                                                                               House Museum of
the best shot in Tennessee). But the wounded Jackson remained standing.
                                                                               American Art.
Bleeding, he slowly steadied his aim and returned fire. The other man
dropped to the ground, mortally wounded. Jackson—still carrying the
bullet in his chest—later boasted, “I should have hit him, if he had shot
me through the brain.”1
    The duel in Logan County, Kentucky, was one of many that Jackson
fought during the course of his long and highly controversial career. The
tenacity, toughness, and vengefulness that carried Jackson alive out of
that duel, and the mythology and symbolism that would be attached to
it, would also characterize many of his later dealings on the battlefield

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
228                                                                         ch a pter 9


             and in politics. By the time of his death almost forty years later, Andrew
             Jackson would become an enduring and controversial symbol, a kind
             of cipher to gauge the ways that various Americans thought about their
             country.


             II. Democracy in the Early Republic
             Today, most Americans think democracy is a good thing. We tend to
             assume the nation’s early political leaders believed the same. Wasn’t the
             American Revolution a victory for democratic principles? For many of
             the founders, however, the answer was no.
                 A wide variety of people participated in early U.S. politics, especially
             at the local level. But ordinary citizens’ growing direct influence on gov-
             ernment frightened the founding elites. At the Constitutional Conven-
             tion in 1787, Alexander Hamilton warned of the “vices of democracy”
             and said he considered the British government—with its powerful king
             and parliament—“the best in the world.”2 Another convention delegate,
             Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, who eventually refused to sign the fin-
             ished Constitution, agreed. “The evils we experience flow from an excess
             of democracy,” he proclaimed.3
                 Too much participation by the multitudes, the elite believed, would
             undermine good order. It would prevent the creation of a secure and
             united republican society. The Philadelphia physician and politician
             Benjamin Rush, for example, sensed that the Revolution had launched
             a wave of popular rebelliousness that could lead to a dangerous new
             type of despotism. “In our opposition to monarchy,” he wrote, “we for-
             got that the temple of tyranny has two doors. We bolted one of them
             by proper restraints; but we left the other open, by neglecting to guard
             against the effects of our own ignorance and licentiousness.”4
                 Such warnings did nothing to quell Americans’ democratic impulses
             in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Americans who
             were allowed to vote (and sometimes those who weren’t) went to the
             polls in impressive numbers. Citizens also made public demonstrations.
             They delivered partisan speeches at patriotic holiday and anniversary cel-
             ebrations. They petitioned Congress, openly criticized the president, and
             insisted that a free people should not defer even to elected leaders. In
             many people’s eyes, the American republic was a democratic republic: the
             people were sovereign all the time, not only on election day.
                 The elite leaders of political parties could not afford to overlook “the
             cultivation of popular favour,” as Alexander Hamilton put it.5 Between

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  229


the 1790s and 1830s, the elite of every state and party learned to ­listen—
or pretend to listen—to the voices of the multitudes. And ironically,
an American president, holding the office that most resembles a king’s,
would come to symbolize the democratizing spirit of American politics.


III. The Missouri Crisis
A more troubling pattern was also emerging in national politics and cul-
ture. During the first decades of the nineteenth century, American politics
shifted toward “sectional” conflict among the states of the North, South,
and West.
    Since the ratification of the Constitution in 1789, the state of Vir-
ginia had wielded more influence on the federal government than any
other state. Four of the first five presidents, for example, were from Vir-
ginia. Immigration caused by the market revolution, however, caused the
country’s population to grow fastest in northern states like New York.
Northern political leaders were becoming wary of what they perceived to
be a disproportionate influence in federal politics by Virginia and other
southern states.
    Furthermore, many northerners feared that the southern states’ com-
mon interest in protecting slavery was creating a congressional voting
bloc that would be difficult for “free states” to overcome. The North
and South began to clash over federal policy as northern states gradually
ended slavery but southern states came to depend even more on slave
labor.
    The most important instance of these rising tensions erupted in the
Missouri Crisis. When white settlers in Missouri, a new territory carved
out of the Louisiana Purchase, applied for statehood in 1819, the bal-
ance of political power between northern and southern states became
the focus of public debate. Missouri already had more than ten thousand
slaves and was poised to join the southern slave states in Congress.6
    Accordingly, Congressman James Tallmadge of New York proposed
an amendment to Missouri’s application for statehood. Tallmadge
claimed that the institution of slavery mocked the Declaration of Inde-
pendence and the liberty it promised to “all men.” He proposed that
Congress should admit Missouri as a state only if bringing more slaves
to Missouri were prohibited and children born to the slaves there were
freed at age twenty-five.
    Congressmen like Tallmadge opposed slavery for moral reasons, but
they also wanted to maintain a sectional balance of power. U­ nsurprisingly,

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
230                                                                         ch a pter 9


             the Tallmadge Amendment met with firm resistance from southern politi-
             cians. It passed in the House of Representatives because of the support
             of nearly all the northern congressmen, who had a majority there, but it
             was quickly defeated in the Senate.
                 When Congress reconvened in 1820, a senator from Illinois, another
             new western state, proposed a compromise. Jesse Thomas hoped his offer
             would not only end the Missouri Crisis but also prevent any future sec-
             tional disputes over slavery and statehood. Senator Henry Clay of Ken-
             tucky joined in promoting the deal, earning himself the nickname “the
             Great Compromiser.”
                 Their bargain, the Missouri Compromise of 1820, contained three
             parts.7 First, Congress would admit Missouri as a slave state. Second,
             Congress would admit Maine (which until now had been a territory of
             Massachusetts) as a free state, maintaining the balance between the num-
             ber of free and slave states. Third, the rest of the Louisiana Purchase
             territory would be divided along the 36°30’ line of latitude—or in other
             words, along the southern border of Missouri. Slavery would be pro-
             hibited in other new states north of this line, but it would be permitted
             in new states to the south. The compromise passed both houses of Con-
             gress, and the Missouri Crisis ended peacefully.
                 Not everyone, however, felt relieved. The Missouri Crisis made the
             sectional nature of American politics impossible to ignore. The Missouri
             Crisis split the Democratic-Republican party entirely along sectional
             lines, suggesting trouble to come.
                 Worse, the Missouri Crisis demonstrated the volatility of the slavery
             debate. Many Americans, including seventy-seven-year-old Thomas Jef-
             ferson, were alarmed at how readily some Americans spoke of disunion
             and even civil war over the issue. “This momentous question, like a fire
             bell in the night, awakened and filled me with terror,” Jefferson wrote.
             “I considered it at once as the [death] knell of the Union.”8
                 For now, the Missouri Crisis did not result in disunion and civil war
             as Jefferson and others feared. But it also failed to settle the issue of
             slavery’s expansion into new western territories. The issue would cause
             worse trouble in years ahead.


             IV. The Rise of Andrew Jackson
             The career of Andrew Jackson (1767–1845), the survivor of that back-
             country Kentucky duel in 1806, exemplified both the opportunities and



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  231


the dangers of political life in the early republic. A lawyer, slaveholder,
and general—and eventually the seventh president of the United States—
he rose from humble frontier beginnings to become one of the most pow-
erful Americans of the nineteenth century.
    Andrew Jackson was born on March 15, 1767, on the border between
North and South Carolina, to two immigrants from northern Ireland. He
grew up during dangerous times. At age thirteen, he joined an American
militia unit in the Revolutionary War. He was soon captured, and a Brit-
ish officer slashed at his head with a sword after he refused to shine the
officer’s shoes. Disease during the war had claimed the lives of his two
brothers and his mother, leaving him an orphan. Their deaths and his
wounds had left Jackson with a deep and abiding hatred of Great Britain.
    After the war, Jackson moved west to frontier Tennessee, where de-
spite his poor education, he prospered, working as a lawyer and acquir-
ing land and slaves. (He would eventually come to keep 150 slaves at the
Hermitage, his plantation near Nashville.) In 1796, Jackson was elected
as a U.S. representative, and a year later he won a seat in the Senate, al-
though he resigned within a year, citing financial difficulties.
    Thanks to his political connections, Jackson obtained a general’s
commission at the outbreak of the War of 1812. Despite having no com-
bat experience, General Jackson quickly impressed his troops, who nick-
named him “Old Hickory” after a particularly tough kind of tree.
    Jackson led his militiamen into battle in the Southeast, first during
the Creek War, a side conflict that started between different factions of
Muskogee (Creek) Indians in present-day Alabama. In that war, he won
a decisive victory over hostile fighters at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in
1814. A year later, he also defeated a large British invasion force at the
Battle of New Orleans. There, Jackson’s troops—including backwoods
militiamen, free African Americans, Indians, and a company of slave-
trading pirates—successfully defended the city and inflicted more than
two thousand casualties against the British, sustaining barely three hun-
dred casualties of their own.9 The Battle of New Orleans was a thrilling
victory for the United States, but it actually happened several days after a
peace treaty was signed in Europe to end the war. News of the treaty had
not yet reached New Orleans.
    The end of the War of 1812 did not end Jackson’s military career. In
1818, as commander of the U.S. southern military district, Jackson also
launched an invasion of Spanish-owned Florida. He was acting on vague
orders from the War Department to break the resistance of the region’s



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
232                                                                                ch a pter 9


                    Seminole Indians, who protected runaway slaves and attacked American
                    settlers across the border. On Jackson’s orders in 1816, U.S. soldiers and
                    their Creek allies had already destroyed the “Negro Fort,” a British-built
                    fortress on Spanish soil, killing 270 former slaves and executing some
                    survivors.10 In 1818, Jackson’s troops crossed the border again. They oc-
                    cupied Pensacola, the main Spanish town in the region, and arrested two
                    British subjects, whom Jackson executed for helping the Seminoles. The
                    execution of these two Britons created an international diplomatic crisis.
                        Most officials in President James Monroe’s administration called for
Images like this—   Jackson’s censure. But Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, the son
showing a young     of former president John Adams, found Jackson’s behavior useful. He
Jackson defending
his family from a   defended the impulsive general, arguing that he had had been forced to
British ­officer—   act. Adams used Jackson’s military successes in this First Seminole War
established
                    to persuade Spain to accept the Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819, which gave
Jackson’s legend.
Currier & Ives,     Florida to the United States.
The Brave Boy           Any friendliness between John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson,
of the Waxhaws,
1876. Wikimedia.    however, did not survive long. In 1824, four nominees competed for




              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  233


the presidency in one of the closest elections in American history. Each
came from a different part of the country—Adams from Massachusetts,
Jackson from Tennessee, William H. Crawford from Georgia, and Henry
Clay from Kentucky. Jackson won more popular votes than anyone else.
But with no majority winner in the Electoral College, the election was
thrown into the House of Representatives. There, Adams used his po-
litical clout to claim the presidency, persuading Clay to support him.
Jackson would never forgive Adams, whom his supporters accused of en-
gineering a “corrupt bargain” with Clay to circumvent the popular will.
     Four years later, in 1828, Adams and Jackson squared off in one of
the dirtiest presidential elections to date.11 Pro-Jackson partisans accused
Adams of elitism and claimed that while serving in Russia as a diplomat
he had offered the Russian emperor an American prostitute. Adams’s
supporters, on the other hand, accused Jackson of murder and attacked
the morality of his marriage, pointing out that Jackson had unwittingly
married his wife Rachel before the divorce on her prior marriage was
complete. This time, Andrew Jackson won the election easily, but Rachel
Jackson died suddenly before his inauguration. Jackson would never for-
give the people who attacked his wife’s character during the campaign.
     In 1828, Jackson’s broad appeal as a military hero won him the presi-
dency. He was “Old Hickory,” the “Hero of New Orleans,” a leader of
plain frontier folk. His wartime accomplishments appealed to many vot-
ers’ pride. Over the next eight years, he would claim to represent the in-
terests of ordinary white Americans, especially from the South and West,
against the country’s wealthy and powerful elite. This attitude would
lead him and his allies into a series of bitter political struggles.


V. The Nullification Crisis
Nearly every American had an opinion about President Jackson. To
some, he epitomized democratic government and popular rule. To oth-
ers, he represented the worst in a powerful and unaccountable executive,
acting as president with the same arrogance he had shown as a general in
Florida. One of the key issues dividing Americans during his presidency
was a sectional dispute over national tax policy that would come to de-
fine Jackson’s no-holds-barred approach to government.
    Once Andrew Jackson moved into the White House, most southern-
ers expected him to do away with the hated Tariff of 1828, the so-called
Tariff of Abominations. This import tax provided protection for northern



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
234                                                                         ch a pter 9


             manufacturing interests by raising the prices of European products in
             America. Southerners, however, blamed the tariff for a massive transfer
             of wealth. It forced them to purchase goods from the North’s manufac-
             turers at higher prices, and it provoked European countries to retaliate
             with high tariffs of their own, reducing foreign purchases of the South’s
             raw materials.
                 Only in South Carolina, though, did the discomfort turn into orga-
             nized action. The state was still trying to shrug off the economic prob-
             lems of the Panic of 1819, but it had also recently endured the Denmark
             Vesey slave conspiracy, which convinced white South Carolinians that
             antislavery ideas put them in danger of a massive slave uprising.
                 Elite South Carolinians were especially worried that the tariff was
             merely an entering wedge for federal legislation that would limit slavery.
             Andrew Jackson’s own vice president, John C. Calhoun, who was from
             South Carolina, asserted that the tariff was “the occasion, rather than the
             real cause of the present unhappy state of things.” The real fear was that
             the federal government might attack “the peculiar domestick institution
             of the Southern States”—meaning slavery.12 When Jackson failed to act
             against the tariff, Vice President Calhoun was caught in a tight position.
                 In 1828, Calhoun secretly drafted the “South Carolina Exposition
             and Protest,” an essay and set of resolutions that laid out the doctrine of
             nullification.13 Drawing from the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of
             1798 and 1799, Calhoun argued that the United States was a compact
             among the states rather than among the whole American people. Since
             the states had created the Union, he reasoned, they were still sovereign,
             so a state could nullify a federal statute it considered unconstitutional.
             Other states would then have to concede the right of nullification or
             agree to amend the Constitution. If necessary, a nullifying state could
             leave the Union.
                 When Calhoun’s authorship of the essay became public, Jackson was
             furious, interpreting it both as a personal betrayal and as a challenge to
             his authority as president. His most dramatic confrontation with Cal-
             houn came in 1832 during a commemoration for Thomas Jefferson. At
             dinner, the president rose and toasted, “Our Federal Union: it must be
             preserved.” Calhoun responded with a toast of his own: “The Union:
             next to our Liberty the most dear.”14 Their divorce was not pretty. Mar-
             tin Van Buren, a New York political leader whose skill in making deals
             had earned him the nickname “the Little Magician,” replaced Calhoun as
             vice president when Jackson ran for reelection in 1832.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  235


     Calhoun returned to South Carolina, where a special state convention
nullified the federal tariffs of 1828 and 1832. It declared them unconsti-
tutional and therefore “null, void, and no law” within South Carolina.15
The convention ordered South Carolina customs officers not to collect
tariff revenue and declared that any federal attempt to enforce the tariffs
would cause the state to secede from the Union.
     President Jackson responded dramatically. He denounced the ordi-
nance of nullification and declared that “disunion, by armed force, is
TREASON.”16 Vowing to hang Calhoun and any other nullifier who de-
fied federal power, he persuaded Congress to pass a Force Bill that au-
thorized him to send the military to enforce the tariffs. Faced with such
threats, other southern states declined to join South Carolina. Privately,
however, Jackson supported the idea of compromise and allowed his po-
litical enemy Henry Clay to broker a solution with Calhoun. Congress
passed a compromise bill that slowly lowered federal tariff rates. South
Carolina rescinded nullification for the tariffs but nullified the Force Bill.
     The legacy of the Nullification Crisis is difficult to sort out. Jackson’s
decisive action seemed to have forced South Carolina to back down. But
the crisis also united the ideas of secession and states’ rights, two con-
cepts that had not necessarily been linked before. Perhaps most clearly,
nullification showed that the immense political power of slaveholders
was matched only by their immense anxiety about the future of slavery.
During later debates in the 1840s and 1850s, they would raise the ideas
of the Nullification Crisis again.


VI. The Eaton Affair and the Politics of Sexuality
Meanwhile, a more personal crisis during Jackson’s first term also drove
a wedge between him and Vice President Calhoun. The Eaton Affair,
sometimes insultingly called the “Petticoat Affair,” began as a disagree-
ment among elite women in Washington, D.C., but it eventually led to
the disbanding of Jackson’s cabinet.
    True to his backwoods reputation, when he took office in 1829, Presi-
dent Jackson chose mostly provincial politicians, not Washington vet-
erans, to serve in his administration. One of them was his friend John
Henry Eaton, a senator from Tennessee, whom Jackson nominated to be
his secretary of war.
    A few months earlier, Eaton had married Margaret O’Neale Tim-
berlake, the recent widow of a navy officer. She was the daughter of



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
236                                                                                 ch a pter 9




This photograph shows Eaton at a much older
age. Eaton, Mrs. Margaret (Peggy O’Neill), old
lady, c. 1870–1880. Library of Congress.


                      Washington boardinghouse proprietors, and her humble origins and
                      combination of beauty, outspokenness, and familiarity with so many men
                      in the boardinghouse had led to gossip. During her first marriage, rumors
                      had circulated that she and John Eaton were having an affair while her
                      husband was at sea. When her first husband committed suicide and she
                      married Eaton just nine months later, the society women of Washington
                      had been scandalized. One wrote that Margaret Eaton’s reputation had
                      been “totally destroyed.”17
                          John Eaton was now secretary of war, but other cabinet members’
                      wives refused have anything to do with his wife. No respectable lady who
                      wanted to protect her own reputation could exchange visits with her, in-
                      vite her to social events, or be seen chatting with her. Most importantly,
                      the vice president’s wife, Floride Calhoun, shunned Margaret Eaton,
                      spending most of her time in South Carolina to avoid her. Even Jackson’s
                      own niece, Emily Donelson, visited Eaton once and then refused to have
                      anything more to do with her.
                          Although women could not vote or hold office, they played an impor-
                      tant role in politics as people who controlled influence.18 They helped hold



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  237


official Washington together. And according to one local society woman,
“the ladies” had “as much rivalship and party spirit, desire of precedence
and authority” as male politicians had.19 These women upheld a strict
code of femininity and sexual morality. They paid careful attention to the
rules that governed personal interactions and official relationships.
    Margaret Eaton’s social exclusion thus greatly affected Jackson, his
cabinet, and the rest of Washington society. At first, President Jackson
blamed his rival Henry Clay for the attacks on the Eatons. But he soon
perceived that Washington women and his new cabinet had initiated the
gossip. Jackson scoffed, “I did not come here to make a cabinet for the
ladies of this place,” and claimed that he “had rather have live vermin
on my back than the tongue of one of these Washington women on my
reputation.”20 He began to blame the ambition of Vice President Calhoun
for Floride Calhoun’s actions, deciding “it was necessary to put him out
of the cabinet and destroy him.”21
    Jackson was so indignant because he had recently been through a
similar scandal with his late wife, Rachel. Her character, too, had been
insulted by leading politicians’ wives because of the circumstances of her
marriage. Jackson believed that Rachel’s death had been caused by those
slanderous attacks. Furthermore, he saw the assaults on the Eatons as
attacks on his authority.
    In one of the most famous presidential meetings in American history,
Jackson called together his cabinet members to discuss what they saw
as the bedrock of society: women’s position as protectors of the nation’s
values. There, the men of the cabinet debated Margaret Eaton’s charac-
ter. Jackson delivered a long defense, methodically presenting evidence
against her attackers. But the men attending the meeting—and their
wives—were not swayed. They continued to shun Margaret Eaton, and
the scandal was resolved only with the resignation of four members of
the cabinet, including Eaton’s husband.


VII. The Bank War
Andrew Jackson’s first term was full of controversy. For all of his reputa-
tion as a military and political warrior, however, the most characteristic
struggle of his presidency was financial. As president, he waged a “war”
against the Bank of the United States.
    The charter of the controversial national bank that Congress estab-
lished under Alexander Hamilton’s financial plan had expired in 1811.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
238                                                                         ch a pter 9


             But five years later, Congress had given a new charter to the Second Bank
             of the United States. Headquartered in Philadelphia, the bank was de-
             signed to stabilize the growing American economy. By requiring other
             banks to pay their debts promptly in gold, it was supposed to prevent
             them from issuing too many paper banknotes that could drop suddenly
             in value. Of course, the Bank of the United States was also supposed to
             reap a healthy profit for its private stockholders, like the Philadelphia
             banker Stephen Girard and the New York merchant John Jacob Astor.
                 Though many Democratic-Republicans had supported the new bank,
             some never gave up their Jeffersonian suspicion that such a powerful in-
             stitution was dangerous to the republic. Andrew Jackson was one of the
             skeptics. He and many of his supporters blamed the bank for the Panic
             of 1819, which had become a severe economic depression. The national
             bank had made that crisis worse, first by lending irresponsibly and then,
             when the panic hit, by hoarding gold currency to save itself at the expense
             of smaller banks and their customers. Jackson’s supporters also believed
             the bank had corrupted many politicians by giving them financial favors.
                 In 1829, after a few months in office, Jackson set his sights on the
             bank and its director, Nicholas Biddle. Jackson became more and more
             insistent over the next three years as Biddle and the bank’s supporters
             fought to save it. A visiting Frenchman observed that Jackson had “de-
             clared a war to the death against the Bank,” attacking it “in the same
             cut-and-thrust style” with which he had once fought the Indians and the
             British. For Jackson, the struggle was a personal crisis. “The Bank is try-
             ing to kill me,” he told Martin Van Buren, “but I will kill it!”22
                 The bank’s charter was not due for renewal for several years, but in
             1832, while Jackson was running for reelection, Congress held an early
             vote to reauthorize the Bank of the United States. The president vetoed
             the bill.
                 In his veto message, Jackson called the bank unconstitutional and
             “dangerous to the liberties of the people.” The charter, he explained,
             didn’t do enough to protect the bank from its British stockholders, who
             might not have Americans’ interests at heart. In addition, Jackson wrote,
             the Bank of the United States was virtually a federal agency, but it had
             powers that were not granted anywhere in the Constitution. Worst of all,
             the bank was a way for well-connected people to get richer at everyone
             else’s expense. “The rich and powerful,” the president declared, “too
             often bend the acts of government to their selfish purposes.”23 Only a
             strictly limited government, Jackson believed, would treat people equally.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  239




“The bank,” Andrew Jackson told Martin Van Buren, “is trying to kill me, but I will kill it!” That is just
the unwavering force that Edward Clay depicted in this lithograph, which praised Jackson for terminating
the Second Bank of the United States. Clay shows Nicholas Biddle as the devil running away from Jackson
as the bank collapses around him, his hirelings, and speculators. Edward W. Clay, c. 1832. Wikimedia.



    Although its charter would not be renewed, the Bank of the United
States could still operate for several more years. So in 1833, to diminish
its power, Jackson also directed his cabinet to stop depositing federal
funds in it. From now on, the government would do business with se-
lected state banks instead. Critics called them Jackson’s “pet banks.”
    Jackson’s bank veto set off fierce controversy. Opponents in Phila-
delphia held a meeting and declared that the president’s ideas were dan-
gerous to private property. Jackson, they said, intended to “place the
honest earnings of the industrious citizen at the disposal of the idle”—in
other words, redistribute wealth to lazy people—and become a “dicta-
tor.”24 A newspaper editor said that Jackson was trying to set “the poor
against the rich,” perhaps in order to take over as a military tyrant.25
But Jackson’s supporters praised him. Pro-Jackson newspaper editors
wrote that he had kept a “monied aristocracy” from conquering the
people.26



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
240                                                                         ch a pter 9


                 By giving President Jackson a vivid way to defy the rich and powerful,
             or at least appear to do so, the Bank War gave his supporters a specific
             “democratic” idea to rally around. More than any other issue, opposi-
             tion to the national bank came to define their beliefs. And by leading
             Jackson to exert executive power so dramatically against Congress, the
             Bank War also helped his political enemies organize.
                 Increasingly, supporters of Andrew Jackson referred to themselves
             as Democrats. Under the strategic leadership of Martin Van Buren,
             they built a highly organized national political party, the first modern
             party in the United States. Much more than earlier political parties, this
             Democratic Party had a centralized leadership structure and a consistent
             ideological program for all levels of government. Meanwhile, Jackson’s
             enemies, mocking him as “King Andrew the First,” named themselves
             after the patriots of the American Revolution, the Whigs.


             VIII. The Panic of 1837
             Unfortunately for Jackson’s Democrats (and most other Americans),
             their victory over the Bank of the United States worsened rather than
             solved the country’s economic problems.
                 Things looked good initially. Between 1834 and 1836, a combination
             of high cotton prices, freely available foreign and domestic credit, and an
             infusion of specie (“hard” currency in the form of gold and silver) from
             Europe spurred a sustained boom in the American economy. At the same
             time, sales of western land by the federal government promoted speculation
             and poorly regulated lending practices, creating a vast real estate bubble.
                 Meanwhile, the number of state-chartered banks grew from 329
             in 1830 to 713 just six years later. As a result, the volume of paper
             banknotes per capita in circulation in the United States increased by
             40 percent between 1834 and 1836. Low interest rates in Great Britain
             also encouraged British capitalists to make risky investments in America.
             British lending across the Atlantic surged, raising American foreign in-
             debtedness from $110 million to $220 million over the same two years.27
                 As the boom accelerated, banks became more careless about the
             amount of hard currency they kept on hand to redeem their banknotes.
             And although Jackson had hoped his bank veto would reduce bankers’
             and speculators’ power over the economy, it actually made the problems
             worse.
                 Two further federal actions late in the Jackson administration also
             worsened the situation. In June 1836, Congress decided to increase the

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  241


number of banks receiving federal deposits. This plan undermined the
banks that were already receiving federal money, since they saw their funds
distributed to other banks. Next, seeking to reduce speculation on credit,
the Treasury Department issued an order called the Specie Circular in July
1836, requiring payment in hard currency for all federal land purchases.
As a result, land buyers drained eastern banks of even more gold and silver.
    By late fall in 1836, America’s economic bubbles began to burst. Fed-
eral land sales plummeted. The New York Herald reported that “lands
in Illinois and Indiana that were cracked up to $10 an acre last year, are
now to be got at $3, and even less.” The newspaper warned darkly, “The
reaction has begun, and nothing can stop it.”28
    Runs on banks began in New York on May 4, 1837, as panicked
customers scrambled to exchange their banknotes for hard currency. By
May 10, the New York banks, running out of gold and silver, stopped
redeeming their notes. As news spread, banks around the nation did the
same. By May 15, the largest crowd in Pennsylvania history had amassed




Many Americans blamed the Panic of 1837 on the economic policies of Andrew Jackson, who is sarcasti-
cally represented in the lithograph as the sun with top hat, spectacle, and a banner of “Glory” around him.
The destitute people in the foreground (representing the common man) are suffering while a prosperous
attorney rides in an elegant carriage in the background (right side of frame). Edward W. Clay, The Times,
1837. Wikimedia.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
242                                                                         ch a pter 9


             outside Independence Hall in Philadelphia, denouncing banking as a
             “system of fraud and oppression.”29
                 The Panic of 1837 led to a general economic depression. Between
             1839 and 1843, the total capital held by American banks dropped by
             40 percent as prices fell and economic activity around the nation slowed
             to a crawl. The price of cotton in New Orleans, for instance, dropped
             50 percent.30
                 Traveling through New Orleans in January 1842, a British diplomat
             reported that the country “presents a lamentable appearance of exhaus-
             tion and demoralization.”31 Over the previous decade, the American
             economy had soared to fantastic new heights and plunged to dramatic
             new depths.
                 Normal banking activity did not resume around the nation until late
             1842. Meanwhile, two hundred banks closed, cash and credit became
             scarce, prices declined, and trade slowed. During this downturn, eight
             states and a territorial government defaulted on loans made by British
             banks to finance internal improvements.32


             IX. Rise of the Whigs
             The disaster of the Panic of 1837 created an opportunity for the Whig
             Party, which had grown partly out of the political coalition of John
             Quincy Adams and Henry Clay and opposed Andrew Jackson and the
             Democratic Party. The National Republicans, a loose alliance concen-
             trated in the Northeast, had become the core of a new anti-Jackson
             movement. But Jackson’s enemies were a varied group; they included
             pro-slavery southerners angry about Jackson’s behavior during the Nul-
             lification Crisis as well as antislavery Yankees.
                  After they failed to prevent Andrew Jackson’s reelection, this fragile
             coalition formally organized as a new party in 1834 “to rescue the Gov-
             ernment and public liberty.”33 Henry Clay, who had run against Jackson
             for president and was now serving again as a senator from Kentucky,
             held private meetings to persuade anti-Jackson leaders from different
             backgrounds to unite. He also gave the new Whig Party its anti-monar-
             chical name.
                  At first, the Whigs focused mainly on winning seats in Congress,
             opposing “King Andrew” from outside the presidency. They remained
             divided by regional and ideological differences. The Democratic presi-
             dential candidate, Vice President Martin Van Buren, easily won election



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  243




                                                    Andrew Jackson portrayed himself as the
                                                    defender of the common man, and in many
                                                    ways he democratized American politics. His
                                                    opponents, however, zeroed in on Jackson’s will-
                                                    ingness to use the powers of the executive office.
                                                    Unwilling to defer to Congress and absolutely
                                                    willing to use his veto power, Jackson came to be
                                                    regarded by his adversaries as a tyrant (or, in this
                                                    case, “King Andrew I.”) Anonymous, c. 1832.
                                                    Wikimedia.


as Jackson’s successor in 1836. But the Whigs gained significant public
support after the Panic of 1837, and they became increasingly well or-
ganized. In late 1839, they held their first national convention in Har-
risburg, Pennsylvania.
    To Henry Clay’s disappointment, the convention voted to nominate
not him but General William Henry Harrison of Ohio as the Whig candi-
date for president in 1840. Harrison was known primarily for defeating
Shawnee warriors led by Tecumseh before and during the War of 1812,
most famously at the Battle of Tippecanoe in present-day Indiana. Whig
leaders viewed him as a candidate with broad patriotic appeal. They por-
trayed him as the “log cabin and hard cider” candidate, a plain man of
the country, unlike the easterner Martin Van Buren. To balance the ticket
with a southerner, the Whigs nominated a slave-owning Virginia senator,
John Tyler, for vice president. Tyler had been a Jackson supporter but had
broken with him over states’ rights during the Nullification Crisis.
    Although “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too” easily won the presidential
election of 1840, this choice of ticket turned out to be disastrous for the
Whigs. Harrison became ill (for unclear reasons, though tradition claims



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
244                                                                                  ch a pter 9




The popular           he contracted pneumonia after delivering a nearly two-hour inaugural
slogan “Tippe-
canoe and Tyler
                      address without an overcoat or hat) and died after just thirty-one days in
Too” helped           office. Harrison thus holds the ironic honor of having the longest inau-
the Whigs and         gural address and the shortest term in office of any American president.34
William Henry
Harrison (with        Vice President Tyler became president and soon adopted policies that
John Tyler) win       looked far more like Andrew Jackson’s than like a Whig’s. After Tyler
the presidential
election in 1840.     twice vetoed charters for another Bank of the United States, nearly his
Pictured here is a    entire cabinet resigned, and the Whigs in Congress expelled “His Acci-
campaign banner
with shortened
                      dency” from the party.
“Tip and Ty,”             The crisis of Tyler’s administration was just one sign of the Whig
one of the many       Party’s difficulty uniting around issues besides opposition to Democrats.
ways that Whigs
waged the “log        The Whig Party succeeded in electing two more presidents but remained
cabin campaign.”      deeply divided. Its problems grew as the issue of slavery strained the
Wikimedia.
                      Union in the 1850s. Unable to agree on a consistent national position
                      on slavery, and unable to find another national issue to rally around, the
                      Whigs broke apart by 1856.


                      X. Anti-Masons, Anti-Immigrants, and the Whig Coalition
                      The Whig coalition drew strength from several earlier parties, includ-
                      ing two that harnessed American political paranoia. The Anti-Masonic

                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  245


Party formed in the 1820s for the purpose of destroying the Freemasons.
Later, anti-immigrant sentiment formed the American Party, also called
the Know-Nothings. The American Party sought and won office across
the country in the 1850s, but nativism had already been an influential
force, particularly in the Whig Party, whose members could not fail to
notice that urban Irish Catholics strongly tended to support Democrats.
     Freemasonry, an international network of social clubs with arcane
traditions and rituals, seems to have originated in medieval Europe as a
trade organization for stonemasons. By the eighteenth century, however,
it had outgrown its relationship with the masons’ craft and had become
a general secular fraternal order that proclaimed adherence to the ideals
of the Enlightenment.
     Freemasonry was an important part of the social life of men in the
new republic’s elite. George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, Andrew
Jackson, and Henry Clay all claimed membership. Prince Hall, a free
leather worker in Boston, founded a separate branch of the order for
African American men. However, the Masonic brotherhood’s secrecy,
elitism, rituals, and secular ideals generated a deep suspicion of the orga-
nization among many Americans.
     In 1820s upstate New York, which was fertile soil for new religious
and social reform movements, anti-Masonic suspicion would emerge for
the first time as an organized political force. The trigger for this was the
strange disappearance and probable murder of William Morgan. Morgan
announced plans to publish an exposé called Illustrations of Masonry.35
This book purported to reveal the order’s secret rites, and it outraged
other local Freemasons. They launched a series of attempts to prevent the
book from being published, including an attempt to burn the press and a
conspiracy to have Morgan jailed for alleged debts. In September, Mor-
gan disappeared. He was last seen being forced into a carriage by four
men later identified as Masons. When a corpse washed up on the shore of
Lake Ontario, Morgan’s wife and friends claimed at first that it was his.
     The Morgan story convinced many people that Masonry was a
dangerous influence in the republic. The publicity surrounding the tri-
als transformed local outrage into a political movement that, though
small, had significant power in New York and parts of New England.
This movement addressed Americans’ widespread dissatisfaction about
economic and political change by giving them a handy explanation: the
republic was controlled by a secret society.
     In 1827, local anti-Masonic committees began meeting across the
state of New York, committing not to vote for any political candidate

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
246                                                                         ch a pter 9


             who belonged to the Freemasons. This boycott grew, and in 1828, a con-
             vention in the town of LeRoy produced an “Anti-Masonic Declaration
             of Independence,” the basis for an Anti-Masonic Party. In 1828, Anti-
             Masonic politicians ran for state offices in New York, winning 12 percent
             of the vote for governor.36
                 In 1830, the Anti-Masons held a national convention in Philadelphia.
             But after a dismal showing in the 1832 presidential elections, the lead-
             ers of the Anti-Masonic Party folded their movement into the new Whig
             Party. The Anti-Masonic Party’s absorption into the Whig coalition dem-
             onstrated the importance of conspiracy theories in American politics. Just
             as Andrew Jackson’s followers detected a vast foreign plot in the form
             of the Bank of the United States, some of his enemies could detect it in
             the form of the Freemasons. Others, called nativists, blamed immigrants.
                 Nativists detected many foreign threats, but Catholicism may have
             been the most important. Nativists watched with horror as more and
             more Catholic immigrants (especially from Ireland and Germany) ar-
             rived in American cities. The immigrants professed different beliefs, often
             spoke unfamiliar languages, and participated in alien cultural traditions.
             Just as importantly, nativists remembered Europe’s history of warfare be-
             tween Catholics and Protestants. They feared that Catholics would bring
             religious violence with them to the United States.
                 In the summer of 1834, a mob of Protestants attacked a Catholic con-
             vent near Boston. The rioters had read newspaper rumors that a woman
             was being held against her will by the nuns. Angry men broke into the
             convent and burned it to the ground. Later, a young woman named Re-
             becca Reed, who had spent time in the convent, published a memoir
             describing abuses she claimed the nuns had directed toward novices and
             students.37 The convent attack was among many eruptions of nativism,
             especially in New England and other parts of the Northeast, during the
             early nineteenth century.
                 Many Protestants saw the Catholic faith as a superstition that de-
             prived individuals of the right to think for themselves and enslaved them
             to a dictator, the pope, in Rome. They accused Catholic priests of con-
             trolling their parishioners and preying sexually on young women. They
             feared that Catholicism would overrun and conquer the American politi-
             cal system, just as their ancestors had feared it would conquer England.
                 The painter and inventor Samuel F. B. Morse, for example, warned
             in 1834 that European tyrants were conspiring together to “carry Pop-
             ery through all our borders” by sending Catholic immigrants to the



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  247


United States. If they succeeded, he predicted, Catholic dominance in
America would mean “the certain destruction of our free institutions.”38
Around the same time, the Protestant minister Lyman Beecher lectured
in various cities, delivering a similar warning. “If the potentates of Eu-
rope have no design upon our liberties,” Beecher demanded, then why
were they sending over “such floods of pauper emigrants—the con-
tents of the poorhouse and the sweepings of the streets—multiplying
tumults and violence, filling our prisons, and crowding our poorhouses,
and quadrupling our taxation”—not to mention voting in American
elections?39


XI. Race and Jacksonian Democracy
More than anything else, however, it was racial inequality that exposed
American democracy’s limits. Over several decades, state governments
had lowered their property requirements so poorer men could vote. But
as northern states ended slavery, whites worried that free black men could
also go to the polls in large numbers. In response, they adopted new laws
that made racial discrimination the basis of American democracy.
    At the time of the Revolution, only two states explicitly limited black
voting rights. By 1839, almost all states did. (The four exceptions were
all in New England, where the Democratic Party was weakest.) For ex-
ample, New York’s 1821 state constitution enfranchised nearly all white
male taxpayers but only the richest black men. In 1838, a similar consti-
tution in Pennsylvania prohibited black voting completely.
    The new Pennsylvania constitution disenfranchised even one of the
richest people in Philadelphia. James Forten, a free-born sailmaker who
had served in the American Revolution, had become a wealthy merchant
and landowner. He used his wealth and influence to promote the aboli-
tion of slavery, and after the 1838 constitution, he undertook a lawsuit
to protect his right to vote. But he lost, and his voting rights were termi-
nated. An English observer commented sarcastically that Forten wasn’t
“white enough” to vote, but “he has always been considered quite white
enough to be taxed.”40
    During the 1830s, furthermore, the social tensions that had promoted
Andrew Jackson’s rise also worsened race relations. Almost four hundred
thousand free blacks lived in America by the end of the decade.41 In the
South and West, Native Americans stood in the way of white expansion.
And the new Irish Catholic immigrants, along with native working-class



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
248                                                                          ch a pter 9


             whites, often despised nonwhites as competitors for scarce work, hous-
             ing, and status.
                 Racial and ethnic resentment thus contributed to a wave of riots in
             American cities during the 1830s. In Philadelphia, thousands of white
             rioters torched an antislavery meeting house and attacked black churches
             and homes. Near St. Louis, abolitionist newspaper editor Elijah Lovejoy
             was murdered as he defended his printing press. Contemplating the vio-
             lence, another journalist wondered, “Does it not appear that the char-
             acter of our people has suffered a considerable change for the worse?”42
                 Racial tensions also influenced popular culture. The white actor
             Thomas Dartmouth Rice appeared on stage in blackface, singing and
             dancing as a clownish slave named “Jim Crow.” Many other white en-
             tertainers copied him. Borrowing from the work of real black performers
             but pandering to white audiences’ prejudices, they turned cruel stereo-
             types into one of antebellum America’s favorite forms of entertainment.
                 Some whites in the 1830s, however, joined free black activists in pro-
             testing racial inequality. Usually, they lived in northern cities and came
             from the class of skilled laborers, or in other words, the lower middle
             class. Most of them were not rich, but they expected to rise in the world.
                 In Boston, for example, the Female Anti-Slavery Society included
             women whose husbands sold coal, mended clothes, and baked bread,
             as well as women from wealthy families. In the nearby village of Lynn,
             many abolitionists were shoemakers. They organized boycotts of con-
             sumer products like sugar that came from slave labor, and they sold
             their own handmade goods at antislavery fund-raising fairs. For many
             of them, the antislavery movement was a way to participate in “respect-
             able” middle-class culture, a way for both men and women to have a say
             in American life.
                 Debates about slavery, therefore, reflected wider tensions in a chang-
             ing society. The ultimate question was whether American democracy had
             room for people of different races as well as religions and classes. Some
             people said yes and struggled to make American society more welcoming.
             But the vast majority, whether Democrats or Whigs, said no.


             XII. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Jonathan Wilfred Wilson, with content contributions
             by Myles Beaupre, Christopher Childers, William Cossen, Adam Costanzo, Na-
             thaniel C. Green, Robert Gudmestad, Spencer McBride, Kevin Waite, and Jona-
             than Wilfred Wilson.


       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  249


    Recommended citation: Myles Beupre et al., “Democracy in America,” Jona-
than Wilfred Wilson, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben
Wright (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

Notes to Ch a p ter 9
     1. Quoted in James Parton, Life of Andrew Jackson, Vol. 1 (New York:
Mason Brothers, 1860), 297.
     2. Max Farrand, ed., The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, Vol. 1
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1911), 288.
     3. Ibid., 48.
     4. Benjamin Rush, “Address to the People of the United States,” in Hezekiah
Niles, ed., Principles and Acts of the Revolution in America (Baltimore: William
Ogden Niles, 1822), 402. http://​catalog​.hathitrust​.org/​Record/​000315501.
     5. Alexander Hamilton to James A. Bayard, April 1802, Founders Online,
National Archives. http://​founders​.archives​.gov/​documents/​Hamilton/​01​-25​-02​
-0321. From The Papers of Alexander Hamilton, Vol. 25, July 1800–April 1802,
ed. Harold C. Syrett (New York: Columbia University Press, 1977), 605–610.
     6. A Century of Population Growth: From the First Census of the United
States to the Twelfth, 1790–1900 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Print-
ing Office, 1909), 133, table 60. http://​       www2​   .census​.gov/​prod2/​
                                                                             decennial
/​documents/​00165897ch14​.pdf.
     7. Conference committee report on the Missouri Compromise, March 1,
1820, Records of Joint Committees of Congress, 1789–1989, National Archives.
http://​www​.ourdocuments​.gov/​doc​.php​?doc​=​22.
     8. Thomas Jefferson to John Holmes, April 22, 1820, Founders Online,
National Archives. http://​founders​.archives​.gov/​documents/​Jefferson/​98​-01​-02​
-1234.
     9. Robert V. Remini, The Battle of New Orleans: Andrew Jackson and
America’s First Military Victory (New York: Penguin, 1999), 167–168.
     10. Kenneth Wiggins Porter, “Negroes and the Seminole War, 1817–1818,”
Journal of Negro History 36, no. 3 (July 1951): 264.
     11. See Lynn Hudson Parsons, The Birth of Modern Politics: Andrew Jack-
son, John Quincy Adams, and the Election of 1828. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2009.
     12. John C. Calhoun to Virgil Maxcy, September 11, 1830, quoted in Wil-
liam M. Meigs, The Life of John Caldwell Calhoun, Vol. 1 (New York: Stechert,
1917), 419.
     13. John C. Calhoun, “Exposition and Protest,” in Union and Liberty: The
Political Philosophy of John C. Calhoun, ed. Ross M. Lence (Indianapolis, IN:
Liberty Fund, 1992), 311–365. http://​oll​.libertyfund​.org/​titles/​683.
     14. Thomas Hart Benton, Thirty Years’ View: Or, a History of the Working
of the American Government for Thirty Years, from 1820 to 1850, Vol. 1 (New
York: Appleton, 1854), 148. http://​catalog​.hathitrust​.org/​Record/​000405607.
     15. South Carolina ordinance of nullification, November 24, 1832, Avalon
Project, Yale Law School. http://​avalon​.law​.yale​.edu/​19th​_century/​ordnull​.asp.



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
250                                                                               ch a pter 9


                  16. Andrew Jackson, proclamation regarding nullification, December 10,
             1832, Avalon Project, Yale Law School. http://​avalon​.law​.yale​.edu/​19th​_century
             /​jack01​.asp.
                  17. Catherine Allgor, Parlor Politics: In Which the Ladies of Washington
             Help Build a City and a Government (Charlottesville: University Press of Vir-
             ginia, 2000), 200.
                  18. Elizabeth R. Varon, We Mean to Be Counted: White Women and Politics
             in Antebellum Virginia (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998).
                  19. Margaret Bayard Smith to Margaret Bayard Boyd, December 20 [?],
             1828, Margaret Bayard Smith Papers, quoted in ibid., 215.
                  20. Andrew Jackson to John Christmas McLemore, April [26], 1829, in The
             Papers of Andrew Jackson, eds. Daniel Feller, Harold D. Moser, Laura-Eve Moss,
             and Thomas Coens, Vol. 7 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2007), 184;
             John F. Marszalek, The Petticoat Affair: Manners, Mutiny, and Sex in Andrew
             Jackson’s White House (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 1997), 64.
                  21. Andrew Jackson to John McLemore, November 24, 1829, quoted in
             Richard E. Ellis, The Union at Risk: Jacksonian Democracy, States’ Rights and
             the Nullification Crisis (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), 61.
                  22. Michel Chevalier and Andrew Jackson, quoted in Andrew Burstein, The
             Passions of Andrew Jackson (New York: Knopf, 2003), 200.
                  23. Andrew Jackson, veto message regarding the Bank of the United States,
             July 10, 1832, Avalon Project, Yale Law School. http://​avalon​.law​.yale​.edu/​19th​
             _century/​ajveto01​.asp.
                  24. “The Philadelphia Meeting,” Niles’ Weekly Register (July 21, 1832),
             375.
                  25. “The Bank Veto,” National Intelligencer, August 9, 1832, in David A.
             Copeland, ed., The Antebellum Era: Primary Documents on Events from 1820
             to 1860 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2003), 153.
                  26. Quoted in Harry Watson, Liberty and Power: The Politics of Jacksonian
             America, rev. ed. (New York: Hill and Wang, 2006), 151.
                  27. Alasdair Roberts, America’s First Great Depression: Economic Crisis
             and Political Disorder after the Panic of 1837 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
             Press, 2012), 31, 36.
                  28. Quoted in ibid., 38.
                  29. “Great Public Meeting in Philadelphia,” Niles’ Weekly Register (May
             27, 1837), 198.
                  30. Roberts, America’s First Great Depression, 23.
                  31. Quoted in ibid., 21.
                  32. Ibid., 53. Also see Jessica Lepler, The Many Panics of 1837: People, Poli-
             tics, and the Creation of a Transatlantic Financial Crisis (New York: Cambridge
             University Press, 2013).
                  33. Henry Clay to Francis Brooke, December 16, 1833, quoted in Michael F.
             Holt, The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jacksonian Politics and the
             Onset of the Civil War (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 29.
                  34. Joseph Nathan Kane, Presidential Fact Book (New York: Random
             House, 1998), 61.

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
De moc r a cy i n A m e r i ca  251


     35. William Morgan, Illustrations of Masonry, by One of the Fraternity,
Who Has Devoted Thirty Years to the Subject (Batavia, NY: Miller, 1826). http://​
archive​.org/​details/​illustrationsofm00morg.
     36. William Preston Vaughn, The Anti-Masonic Party in the United
States: 1826–1843, paperback ed. (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky,
2009), 31.
     37. Rebecca Theresa Reed, Six Months in a Convent, or, The Narrative of
Rebecca Theresa Reed (Boston: Russell, Odiorne and Metcalf, 1835). http://​
archive​.org/​details/​sixmonthsinconve00reedr.
     38. [Samuel F. B. Morse], Foreign Conspiracy against the Liberties of the
United States (New York: Leavitt, Lord, 1835), 16, 127. http://​        archive​
                                                                               .org
/​details/​foreignconspira00mors.
     39. Lyman Beecher, A Plea for the West, 2nd ed. (Cincinnati, OH: Truman
and Smith, 1835), 54, http://​archive​.org/​details/​pleaforwest00beec.
     40. Frederick Marryat, Diary in America with Remarks on Its Institutions
(London: Longman, 1839), Vol. 1, 297, quoted in Eric Ledell Smith, “The End
of Black Voting Rights in Pennsylvania: African Americans and the Pennsylva-
nia Constitutional Convention of 1837–1838,” Pennsylvania History 65, no. 3
(Summer 1998): 296.
     41. Michael R. Haines, “Table Aa145-184: Population, by Sex and Race:
1790–1990,” Historical Statistics of the United States, millennial ed. online,
eds. Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olm-
stead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2006). http://​hsus​.cambridge​.org.
     42. Niles’ Weekly Register (August 23, 1834), 426.

R e c om m e n d e d R e adi n g
Allgor, Catherine. Parlor Politics: In Which the Ladies of Washington Help
     Build a City and a Government. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia,
     2000.
Burstein, Andrew. The Passions of Andrew Jackson. New York: Knopf, 2003.
Ellis, Richard E. The Union at Risk: Jacksonian Democracy, States’ Rights and
     the Nullification Crisis. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Feller, Daniel. The Jacksonian Promise: America, 1815–1840. Baltimore: Johns
     Hopkins University Press, 1995.
Foster, A. Kristen. Moral Visions and Material Ambitions: Philadelphia Struggles
     to Define the Republic, 1776–1836. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2004.
Freeman, Joanne B. Affairs of Honor: National Politics in the New Republic.
     New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2002.
Hansen, Deborah Gold. Strained Sisterhood: Gender and Class in the Boston Fe-
     male Anti-Slavery Society. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1993.
Holt, Michael F. The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jacksonian Pol-
     itics and the Onset of the Civil War. New York: Oxford University Press,
     1999.
Howe, Daniel Walker. The Political Culture of the American Whigs. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 1979.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
252                                                                            ch a pter 9


             Jeffrey, Julie Roy. The Great Silent Army of Abolitionism: Ordinary Women in
                  the Antislavery Movement. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
                  1998.
             Kamensky, Jane. The Exchange Artist: A Tale of High-Flying Speculation and
                  America’s First Banking Collapse. New York: Penguin, 2008.
             Lepler, Jessica. The Many Panics of 1837: People, Politics, and the Creation of a
                  Transatlantic Financial Crisis. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
             Lhamon, W. T., Jr. Jump Jim Crow: Lost Plays, Lyrics, and Street Prose of the
                  First Atlantic Popular Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
                  2003.
             Malone, Christopher. Between Freedom and Bondage: Race, Party, and Voting
                  Rights in the Antebellum North. New York: Routledge, 2008.
             McInnis, Maurie D. The Politics of Taste in Antebellum Charleston. Chapel Hill:
                  University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
             Parsons, Lynn Hudson. The Birth of Modern Politics: Andrew Jackson, John
                  Quincy Adams, and the Election of 1828. New York: Oxford University
                  Press, 2009.
             Roberts, Alasdair. America’s First Great Depression: Economic Crisis and Politi-
                  cal Disorder After the Panic of 1837. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
                  2012.
             Roediger, David R. The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the Ameri-
                  can Working Class, rev. ed. New York: Verso, 1999.
             Siddali, Silvana R. Frontier Democracy: Constitutional Conventions in the Old
                  Northwest. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
             Stansel, Christine. City of Women: Sex and Class in New York, 1789–1860. New
                  York: Knopf, 1986.
             Varon, Elizabeth R. We Mean to Be Counted: White Women and Politics in An-
                  tebellum Virginia. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998.
             Vaughn, William Preston. The Anti-Masonic Party in the United States: 1826–
                  1843, paperback ed. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2009.
             Watson, Harry. Liberty and Power: The Politics of Jacksonian America, rev. ed.
                  New York: Hill and Wang, 2006.
             Wellman, Judith. Grassroots Reform in the Burned-Over District of Upstate New
                  York: Religion, Abolitionism, and Democracy. New York: Routledge, 2016.
             Wilentz, Sean. The Rise of American Democracy: Jefferson to Lincoln. New
                  York: Norton, 2005.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
10
Religion and Reform

I. Introduction
The early nineteenth century was a period of immense change in the             Camp Meeting of
                                                                               the Methodists
United States. Economic, political, demographic, and territorial trans-        in N. America,
formations radically altered how Americans thought about themselves,           1819. Library of
                                                                               Congress.
their communities, and the rapidly expanding nation. It was a period of
great optimism, with the possibilities of self-governance infusing every-
thing from religion to politics. Yet it was also a period of great conflict,
as the benefits of industrialization and democratization increasingly ac-
crued along starkly uneven lines of gender, race, and class. Westward
expansion distanced urban dwellers from frontier settlers more than ever
before, even as the technological innovations of industrialization—like
the telegraph and railroads—offered exciting new ways to maintain com-
munication. The spread of democracy opened the franchise to nearly all



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
254                                                                       chapte r 10


             white men, but urbanization and a dramatic influx of European migra-
             tion increased social tensions and class divides.
                 Americans looked on these changes with a mixture of enthusiasm and
             suspicion, wondering how the moral fabric of the new nation would hold
             up to emerging social challenges. Increasingly, many turned to two pow-
             erful tools to help understand and manage the various transformations:
             spiritual revivalism and social reform. Reacting to the rationalism of the
             eighteenth-century Enlightenment, the religious revivals of the Second
             Great Awakening reignited Protestant spirituality during the early nine-
             teenth century. The revivals incorporated worshippers into an expansive
             religious community that crisscrossed all regions of the United States and
             armed them with a potent evangelical mission. Many emerged from these
             religious revivals with a conviction that human society could be changed
             to look more heavenly. They joined their spiritual networks to rapidly
             developing social reform networks that sought to alleviate social ills and
             eradicate moral vice. Tackling numerous issues, including alcoholism,
             slavery, and the inequality of women, reformers worked tirelessly to re-
             make the world around them. While not all these initiatives were success-
             ful, the zeal of reform and the spiritual rejuvenation that inspired it were
             key facets of antebellum life and society.


             II. Revival and Religious Change
             In the early nineteenth century, a succession of religious revivals collec-
             tively known as the Second Great Awakening remade the nation’s reli-
             gious landscape. Revivalist preachers traveled on horseback, sharing the
             message of spiritual and moral renewal to as many as possible. Residents
             of urban centers, rural farmlands, and frontier territories alike flocked to
             religious revivals and camp meetings, where intense physical and emo-
             tional enthusiasm accompanied evangelical conversion.
                 The Second Great Awakening emerged in response to powerful intel-
             lectual and social currents. Camp meetings captured the democratizing
             spirit of the American Revolution, but revivals also provided a unifying
             moral order and new sense of spiritual community for Americans strug-
             gling with the great changes of the day. The market revolution, western
             expansion, and European immigration all challenged traditional bonds
             of authority, and evangelicalism promised equal measures of excitement
             and order. Revivals spread like wildfire throughout the United States,
             swelling church membership, spawning new Christian denominations,
             and inspiring social reform.

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  255


     One of the earliest and largest revivals of the Second Great Awaken-
ing occurred in Cane Ridge, Kentucky, over a one-week period in August
1801. The Cane Ridge Revival drew thousands of people, and possibly
as many as one of every ten residents of Kentucky.1 Though large crowds
had previously gathered annually in rural areas each late summer or fall
to receive communion, this assembly was very different.2 Methodist, Bap-
tist, and Presbyterian preachers all delivered passionate sermons, exhort-
ing the crowds to strive for their own salvation. They preached from
inside buildings, evangelized outdoors under the open sky, and even used
tree stumps as makeshift pulpits, all to reach their enthusiastic audiences
in any way possible. Women, too, exhorted, in a striking break with com-
mon practice. Attendees, moved by the preachers’ fervor, responded by
crying, jumping, speaking in tongues, or even fainting.3
     Events like the Cane Ridge Revival did spark significant changes in
Americans’ religious affiliations. Many revivalists abandoned the com-
paratively formal style of worship observed in the well-established Con-
gregationalist and Episcopalian churches and instead embraced more
impassioned forms of worship that included the spontaneous jumping,
shouting, and gesturing found in new and alternative denominations.
The ranks of Christian denominations such as the Methodists, Baptists,
and Presbyterians swelled precipitously alongside new denominations
such as the Seventh-Day Adventist Church. The evangelical fire reached
such heights, in fact, that one swath of western and central New York
state came to be known as the Burned-Over District. Charles Grandi-
son Finney, the influential revivalist preacher who first coined the term,
explained that the residents of this area had experienced so many reviv-
als by different religious groups that that there were no more souls to
awaken to the fire of spiritual conversion.4
     Removing the government support of churches created what historians
call the American spiritual marketplace. Methodism achieved the most re-
markable success, enjoying the most significant denominational increase
in American history. By 1850, Methodism was by far the most popular
American denomination. The Methodist denomination grew from fewer
than one thousand members at the end of the eighteenth century to consti-
tute 34 percent of all American church membership by the midnineteenth
century.5 After its leaders broke with the Church of England to form a
new American denomination in 1784, the Methodist Episcopal Church
(MEC) achieved its growth through innovation. Methodists used itiner-
ant preachers, known as circuit riders. These men (and the occasional
woman) won converts by pushing west with the ­expanding United States

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
256                                                                       chapte r 10


             over the Alleghenies and into the Ohio River Valley, bringing religion to
             new settlers hungry to have their spiritual needs a­ ttended. Circuit riding
             took preachers into homes, meetinghouses, and churches, all mapped out
             at regular intervals that collectively took about two weeks to complete.
                 Revolutionary ideals also informed a substantial theological critique
             of orthodox Calvinism that had far-reaching consequences for religious
             individuals and for society as a whole. Calvinists believed that all of hu-
             mankind was marred by sin, and God predestined only some for salvation.
             These attitudes began to seem too pessimistic for many American Chris-
             tians. Worshippers increasingly began to take responsibility for their own
             spiritual fates by embracing theologies that emphasized human action in
             effecting salvation, and revivalist preachers were quick to recognize the
             importance of these cultural shifts. Radical revivalist preachers, such as
             Charles Grandison Finney, put theological issues aside and evangelized
             by appealing to worshippers’ hearts and emotions. Even more conser-
             vative spiritual leaders, such as Lyman Beecher of the Congregational
             Church, appealed to younger generations of Americans by adopting a less
             orthodox approach to Calvinist doctrine.6 Though these men did not see
             eye to eye, they both contributed to the emerging consensus that all souls
             are equal in salvation and that all people can be saved by surrendering to
             God. This idea of spiritual egalitarianism was one of the most important
             transformations to emerge out of the Second Great Awakening.
                 Spiritual egalitarianism dovetailed neatly with an increasingly demo-
             cratic United States. In the process of winning independence from Britain,
             the revolution weakened the power of long-standing social hierarchies
             and the codes of conduct that went along with them. The democratizing
             ethos opened the door for a more egalitarian approach to spiritual lead-
             ership. Whereas preachers of long-standing denominations like the Con-
             gregationalists were required to have a divinity degree and at least some
             theological training in order to become spiritual leaders, many alterna-
             tive denominations only required a conversion experience and a super-
             natural “call to preach.” This meant, for example, that a twenty-year-old
             man could go from working in a mill to being a full-time circuit-riding
             preacher for the Methodists practically overnight. Indeed, their emphasis
             on spiritual egalitarianism over formal training enabled Methodists to
             outpace spiritual competition during this period. Methodists attracted
             more new preachers to send into the field, and the lack of formal training
             meant that individual preachers could be paid significantly less than a
             Congregationalist preacher with a divinity degree.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  257


    In addition to the divisions between evangelical and nonevangelical
denominations wrought by the Second Great Awakening, the revivals
and subsequent evangelical growth also revealed strains within the Meth-
odist and Baptist churches. Each witnessed several schisms during the
1820s and 1830s as reformers advocated for a return to the practices
and policies of an earlier generation. Many others left mainstream Prot-
estantism altogether, opting instead to form their own churches. Some,
like Alexander Campbell and Barton Stone, proposed a return to (or
“restoration” of) New Testament Christianity, stripped of centuries of
additional teachings and practices.7 Other restorationists built on the
foundation laid by the evangelical churches by using their methods and
means to both critique the Protestant mainstream and move beyond the
accepted boundaries of contemporary Christian orthodoxy. Self-declared
prophets claimed that God had called them to establish new churches
and introduce new (or, in their understanding, restore lost) teachings,
forms of worship, and even scripture.
    Mormon founder Joseph Smith, for example, claimed that God the
Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him in a vision in a grove of trees
near his boyhood home in upstate New York and commanded him to
“join none of [the existing churches], for they are all wrong.”8 Subse-
quent visitations from angelic beings revealed to Smith the location of a
buried record, purportedly containing the writings and histories of an an-
cient Christian civilization on the American continent. Smith published
the Book of Mormon in early 1830 and organized the Church of Christ
(later renamed the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints) a short
time later. Borrowing from the Methodists a faith in the abilities of itiner-
ant preachers without formal training, Smith dispatched early converts
as missionaries to take the message of the Book of Mormon throughout
the United States, across the ocean to England and Ireland, and eventu-
ally even farther abroad. He attracted a sizable number of followers on
both sides of the Atlantic and commanded them to gather to a center
place, where they collectively anticipated the imminent second coming
of Christ. Continued growth and near-constant opposition from both
Protestant ministers and neighbors suspicious of their potential political
power forced the Mormons to move several times, first from New York
to Ohio, then to Missouri, and finally to Illinois, where they established a
thriving community on the banks of the Mississippi River. In Nauvoo, as
they called their city, Smith moved even further beyond the bounds of the
Christian orthodoxy by continuing to pronounce a­ dditional ­revelations



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
258                                                                       chapte r 10


             and introducing secret rites to be performed in Mormon temples. Most
             controversially, Smith and a select group of his most loyal followers began
             taking additional wives (Smith himself married at least thirty women).
             Although Mormon polygamy was not publicly acknowledged and openly
             practiced until 1852 (when the Mormons had moved yet again, this time
             to the protective confines of the intermountain west on the shores of the
             Great Salt Lake), rumors of Smith’s involvement circulated almost imme-
             diately after its quiet introduction and played a part in the motivations of
             the mob that eventually murdered the Mormon prophet in the summer
             of 1844.
                 Mormons were not the only religious community in antebellum Amer-
             ica to challenge the domestic norms of the era through radical sexual ex-
             periments: Shakers strictly enforced celibacy in their several communes
             scattered throughout New England and the upper Midwest, while John
             Humphrey Noyes introduced free love (or “complex marriage”) to his
             Oneida community in upstate New York. Others challenged existing cul-
             tural customs in less radical ways. For individual worshippers, spiritual
             egalitarianism in revivals and camp meetings could break down tradi-
             tional social conventions. For example, revivals generally admitted both
             men and women. Furthermore, in an era when many American Protes-
             tants discouraged or outright forbade women from speaking in church
             meetings, some preachers provided women with new opportunities to
             openly express themselves and participate in spiritual communities. This
             was particularly true in the Methodist and Baptist traditions, though by
             the midnineteenth century most of these opportunities would be curtailed
             as these denominations attempted to move away from radical revival-
             ism and toward the status of respectable denominations. Some preachers
             also promoted racial integration in religious gatherings, expressing equal
             concern for white and black people’s spiritual salvation and encouraging
             both slaveholders and the enslaved to attend the same meetings. Histo-
             rians have even suggested that the extreme physical and vocal manifes-
             tations of conversion seen at impassioned revivals and camp meetings
             offered the ranks of worshippers a way to enact a sort of social leveling
             by flouting the codes of self-restraint prescribed by upper-class elites. Al-
             though the revivals did not always live up to such progressive ideals in
             practice, particularly in the more conservative regions of the slavehold-
             ing South, the concept of spiritual egalitarianism nonetheless changed
             how Protestant Americans thought about themselves, their God, and one
             another.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  259


    As the borders of the United States expanded during the nineteenth
century and as new demographic changes altered urban landscapes, reviv-
alism also offered worshippers a source of social and religious structure
to help cope with change. Revival meetings held by itinerant preachers
offered community and collective spiritual purpose to migrant families
and communities isolated from established social and religious institu-
tions. In urban centers, where industrialization and European famines
brought growing numbers of domestic and foreign migrants, evangelical
preachers provided moral order and spiritual solace to an increasingly
anonymous population. Additionally, and quite significantly, the Second
Great Awakening armed evangelical Christians with a moral purpose to
address and eradicate the many social problems they saw as arising from
these dramatic demographic shifts.
    Not all American Christians, though, were taken with the revivals.
The early nineteenth century also saw the rise of Unitarianism as a group
of ministers and their followers came to reject key aspects of “orthodox”
Protestant belief including the divinity of Christ. Christians in New En­
gland were particularly involved in the debates surrounding Unitarianism
as Harvard University became a hotly contested center of cultural author-
ity between Unitarians and Trinitarians. Unitarianism had important ef-
fects on the world of reform when a group of Unitarian ministers founded
the Transcendental Club in 1836.9 The club met for four years and in-
cluded Ralph Waldo Emerson, Bronson Alcott, Frederic Henry Hedge,
George Ripley, Orestes Brownson, James Freeman Clarke, and Theodore
Parker. While initially limited to ministers or former ministers—except
for the eccentric Alcott—the club quickly expanded to include numerous
literary intellectuals. Among these were the author Henry David Tho-
reau, the protofeminist and literary critic Margaret Fuller, and the educa-
tional reformer Elizabeth Peabody.
    Transcendentalism had no established creed, but this was intentional.
What united the Transcendentalists was their belief in a higher spiritual
principle within each person that could be trusted to discover truth, guide
moral action, and inspire art. They often referred to this principle as
Soul, Spirit, Mind, or Reason. Deeply influenced by British Romanti-
cism and German idealism’s celebration of individual artistic inspiration,
personal spiritual experience, and aspects of human existence not easily
explained by reason or logic, the Transcendentalists established an en-
during legacy precisely because they developed distinctly American ideas
that emphasized individualism, optimism, oneness with nature, and a



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
260                                                                       chapte r 10


             modern ­orientation toward the future rather than the past. These themes
             resonated in an American nineteenth century where political democracy
             and readily available land distinguished the United States from Europe.
                  Ralph Waldo Emerson espoused a religious worldview wherein God,
             “the eternal ONE,” manifested through the special harmony between
             the individual soul and nature. In “The American Scholar” (1837) and
             “Self-Reliance” (1841), Emerson emphasized the utter reliability and suf-
             ficiency of the individual soul and exhorted his audience to overcome
             “our long apprenticeship to the learning of other lands.”10 Emerson be-
             lieved that the time had come for Americans to declare their intellectual
             independence from Europe. Henry David Thoreau espoused a similar en-
             thusiasm for simple living, communion with nature, and self-sufficiency.
             Thoreau’s sense of rugged individualism, perhaps the strongest among
             even the Transcendentalists, also yielded “Resistance to Civil Govern-
             ment” (1849).11 Several of the Transcendentalists also participated in
             communal living experiments. For example, in the mid-1840s, George
             Ripley and other members of the utopian Brook Farm community began
             to espouse Fourierism, a vision of society based on cooperative princi-
             ples, as an alternative to capitalist conditions.12
                 Many of these different types of response to the religious turmoil of
             the time had a similar endpoint in the embrace of voluntary associations
             and social reform work. During the antebellum period, many American
             Christians responded to the moral anxiety of industrialization and ur-
             banization by organizing to address specific social needs. Social problems
             such as intemperance, vice, and crime assumed a new and distressing
             scale that older solutions, such as almshouses, were not equipped to han-
             dle. Moralists grew concerned about the growing mass of urban residents
             who did not attend church, and who, thanks to poverty or illiteracy,
             did not even have access to scripture. Voluntary benevolent societies
             exploded in number to tackle these issues. Led by ministers and domi-
             nated by middle-class women, voluntary societies printed and distributed
             Protestant tracts, taught Sunday school, distributed outdoor relief, and
             evangelized in both frontier towns and urban slums. These associations
             and their evangelical members also lent moral backing and workers to
             large-scale social reform projects, including the temperance movement
             designed to curb Americans’ consumption of alcohol, the abolitionist
             campaign to eradicate slavery in the United States, and women’s rights
             agitation to improve women’s political and economic rights. As such
             wide-ranging reform projects combined with missionary zeal, evangelical



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  261


Christians formed a “benevolent empire” that swiftly became a corner-
stone of the antebellum period.


III. Atlantic Origins of Reform
The reform movements that emerged in the United States during the first
half of the nineteenth century were not American inventions. Instead,
these movements were rooted in a transatlantic world where both sides of
the ocean faced similar problems and together collaborated to find simi-
lar solutions. Many of the same factors that spurred American reformers
to action—such as urbanization, industrialization, and class struggle—
equally affected Europe. Reformers on both sides of the Atlantic visited
and corresponded with one another. Exchanging ideas and building net-
works proved crucial to shared causes like abolition and women’s rights.
    Improvements in transportation, including the introduction of
the steamboat, canals, and railroads, connected people not just across
the United States, but also with other like-minded reformers in Europe.
(Ironically, the same technologies also helped ensure that even after the
abolition of slavery in the British Empire, the British remained heavily
invested in slavery, both directly and indirectly.) Equally important, the
reduction of publication costs created by new printing technologies in the
1830s allowed reformers to reach new audiences across the world.13 Al-
most immediately after its publication in the United States, for instance,
the escaped slave and abolitionist Frederick Douglass’s autobiography
was republished in Europe and translated into French and Dutch, galva-
nizing Douglass’s supporters across the Atlantic.14
    Such exchanges began as part of the larger processes of colonialism
and empire building. Missionary organizations from the colonial era had
created many of these transatlantic links. The Atlantic travel of major
figures during the First Great Awakening such as George Whitefield
had built enduring networks. These networks changed as a result of the
American Revolution but still revealed spiritual and personal connections
between religious individuals and organizations in the United States and
Great Britain. These connections can be seen in multiple areas. Mission
work continued to be a joint effort, with American and European mis-
sionary societies in close correspondence throughout the early nineteenth
century, as they coordinated domestic and foreign evangelistic missions.
The transportation and print revolutions meant that news of British mis-
sionary efforts in India and Tahiti could be quickly printed in American



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
262                                                                       chapte r 10


             religious periodicals, galvanizing American efforts to evangelize Native
             Americans, frontier settlers, immigrant groups, and even people overseas.
                 In addition to missions, antislavery work had a decidedly transatlan-
             tic cast from its very beginnings. American Quakers began to question
             slavery as early as the late seventeenth century and worked with Brit-
             ish reformers in the successful campaign that ended the slave trade.15
             Before, during, and after the Revolution, many Americans continued to
             admire European thinkers. Influence extended both east and west. By
             foregrounding questions about rights, the American Revolution helped
             inspire British abolitionists, who in turn offered support to their Ameri-
             can counterparts. American antislavery activists developed close relation-
             ships with abolitionists on the other side of the Atlantic, such as Thomas
             Clarkson, Daniel O’Connell, and Joseph Sturge. Prominent American
             abolitionists such as Theodore Dwight Weld, Lucretia Mott, and Wil-
             liam Lloyd Garrison were converted to the antislavery idea of immedi-
             atism—that is, the demand for emancipation without delay—by British
             abolitionists Elizabeth Heyrick and Charles Stuart.16 Although Anglo-
             American antislavery networks reached back to the late eighteenth cen-
             tury, they dramatically grew in support and strength over the antebellum
             period, as evidenced by the General Anti-Slavery Convention of 1840.
             This antislavery delegation consisted of more than five hundred aboli-
             tionists, mostly coming from France, England, and the United States. All
             met together in England, united by their common goal of ending slavery
             in their time. Although abolitionism was not the largest American reform
             movement of the antebellum period (that honor belongs to temperance),
             it did foster greater cooperation among reformers in England and the
             United States.
                 In the course of their abolitionist activities, many American women
             began to establish contact with their counterparts across the Atlantic,
             each group penning articles and contributing material support to the oth-
             ers’ antislavery publications and fundraisers. The bonds between Brit-
             ish and American reformers can be traced throughout the many social
             improvement projects of the nineteenth century. Transatlantic coopera-
             tion galvanized efforts to reform individuals’ and societies’ relationships
             to alcohol, labor, religion, education, commerce, and land ownership.
             This cooperation stemmed from the recognition that social problems on
             both sides of the Atlantic were strikingly similar. Atlantic activists helped
             American reformers conceptualize themselves as part of a worldwide
             moral mission to attack social ills and spread the gospel of Christianity.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  263




This enormous painting documents the 1840 convention of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society,
established by both American and English antislavery activists to promote worldwide abolition. Benjamin
Haydon, The Anti-Slavery Society Convention, 1840. Wikimedia.




IV. The Benevolent Empire
After religious disestablishment, citizens of the United States faced a di-
lemma: how to cultivate a moral and virtuous public without aid from
state-sponsored religion. Most Americans agreed that a good and moral
citizenry was essential for the national project to succeed, but many
shared the perception that society’s moral foundation was weakening.
Narratives of moral and social decline, known as jeremiads, had long
been embedded in Protestant story-telling traditions, but jeremiads took
on new urgency in the antebellum period. In the years immediately fol-
lowing disestablishment, “traditional” Protestant Christianity was at low
tide, while the Industrial Revolution and the spread of capitalism had
led to a host of social problems associated with cities and commerce.
The Second Great Awakening was in part a spiritual response to such



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
264                                                                       chapte r 10


             changes, revitalizing Christian spirits through the promise of salvation.
             The revivals also provided an institutional antidote to the insecurities
             of a rapidly changing world by inspiring an immense and widespread
             movement for social reform. Growing directly out of nineteenth-century
             revivalism, reform societies proliferated throughout the United States be-
             tween 1815 and 1861, melding religion and reform into a powerful force
             in American culture known as the benevolent empire.
                 The benevolent empire departed from revivalism’s early populism,
             as middle-class ministers dominated the leadership of antebellum re-
             form societies. Because of the economic forces of the market revolution,
             middle-class evangelicals had the time and resources to devote to reform
             campaigns. Often, their reforms focused on creating and maintaining
             respectable middle-class culture throughout the United States. Middle-
             class women, in particular, played a leading role in reform activity. They
             became increasingly responsible for the moral maintenance of their
             homes and communities, and their leadership signaled a dramatic depar-
             ture from previous generations when such prominent roles for ordinary
             women would have been unthinkable.17
                 Different forces within evangelical Protestantism combined to en-
             courage reform. One of the great lights of benevolent reform was Charles
             Grandison Finney, the radical revivalist, who promoted a movement
             known as “perfectionism.” Premised on the belief that truly redeemed
             Christians would be motivated to live free of sin and reflect the perfec-
             tion of God himself, his wildly popular revivals encouraged his converted
             followers to join reform movements and create God’s kingdom on earth.
             The idea of “disinterested benevolence” also turned many evangelicals
             toward reform. Preachers championing disinterested benevolence argued
             that true Christianity requires that a person give up self-love in favor
             of loving others. Though perfectionism and disinterested benevolence
             were the most prominent forces encouraging benevolent societies, some
             preachers achieved the same end in their advocacy of postmillennialism.
             In this worldview, Christ’s return was foretold to occur after humanity
             had enjoyed one thousand years’ peace, and it was the duty of converted
             Christians to improve the world around them in order to pave the way
             for Christ’s redeeming return. Though ideological and theological issues
             like these divided Protestants into more and more sects, church leaders
             often worked on an interdenominational basis to establish benevolent
             societies and draw their followers into the work of social reform.
                 Under the leadership of preachers and ministers, reform societies at-
             tacked many social problems. Those concerned about drinking could join

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  265




Eastern State Penitentiary changed the principles of imprisonment, focusing on reform rather than punish-
ment. The structure itself used the panopticon surveillance system and was widely copied by prison systems
around the world. P. S. Duval and Co., The State Penitentiary for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania,
1855. Wikimedia. Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic.



temperance societies; other groups focused on eradicating dueling and
gambling. Evangelical reformers might support home or foreign missions
or Bible and tract societies. Sabbatarians fought tirelessly to end non-
religious activity on the Sabbath. Moral reform societies sought to end
prostitution and redeem “fallen women.” Over the course of the antebel-
lum period, voluntary associations and benevolent activists also worked
to reform bankruptcy laws, prison systems, insane asylums, labor laws,
and education. They built orphanages and free medical dispensaries and
developed programs to provide professional services like social work, job
placement, and day camps for children in the slums.
    These organizations often shared membership as individuals found
themselves interested in a wide range of reform movements. On Anniver-
sary Week, many of the major reform groups coordinated the schedules
of their annual meetings in New York or Boston to allow individuals to
attend multiple meetings in a single trip.18
    Among all the social reform movements associated with the benevo-
lent empire, the temperance crusade was the most successful. Championed
by prominent preachers like Lyman Beecher, the movement’s effort to
curb the consumption of alcohol galvanized widespread support among
the middle class. Alcohol consumption became a significant social issue

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
266                                                                                chapte r 10




N. Currier, Tree of   after the American Revolution. Commercial distilleries produced readily
Temperance and
Tree of Intem-
                      available, cheap whiskey that was frequently more affordable than milk
perance, 1849.        or beer and safer than water, and hard liquor became a staple beverage
Courtesy Ameri-       in many lower- and middle-class households. Consumption among adults
can Antiquarian
Society.              skyrocketed in the early nineteenth century, and alcoholism had become
                      an endemic problem across the United States by the 1820s. As alcoholism
                      became an increasingly visible issue in towns and cities, most reformers
                      escalated their efforts from advocating moderation in liquor consump-
                      tion to full abstinence from all alcohol.
                          Many reformers saw intemperance as the biggest impediment to main-
                      taining order and morality in the young republic. Temperance reformers
                      saw a direct correlation between alcohol and other forms of vice and,
                      most importantly, felt that it endangered family life. In 1826, evangelical
                      ministers organized the American Temperance Society to help spread the
                      crusade nationally. It supported lecture campaigns, produced temperance
                      literature, and organized revivals specifically aimed at encouraging wor-
                      shippers to give up the drink. It was so successful that within a decade,
                      it established five thousand branches and grew to over a million mem-
                      bers.19 Temperance reformers pledged not to touch the bottle and can-
                      vassed their neighborhoods and towns to encourage others to join their

                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  267


“Cold Water Army.” They also influenced lawmakers in several states to
prohibit the sale of liquor.
    In response to the perception that heavy drinking was associated
with men who abused, abandoned, or neglected their family obligations,
women formed a significant presence in societies dedicated to eradicat-
ing liquor. Temperance became a hallmark of middle-class respectability
among both men and women and developed into a crusade with a visible
class character. Temperance, like many other reform efforts, was champi-
oned by the middle class and threatened to intrude on the private lives of
lower-class workers, many of whom were Irish Catholics. Such intrusions
by the Protestant middle class exacerbated class, ethnic, and religious
tensions. Still, while the temperance movement made less substantial in-
roads into lower-class workers’ drinking culture, the movement was still
a great success for reformers. In the 1840s, Americans drank half of what
they had in the 1820s, and per capita consumption continued to decline
over the next two decades.20
    Though middle-class reformers worked tirelessly to cure all manner         Nathaniel Currier,
                                                                               The Drunkard’s
of social problems through institutional salvation and voluntary benevo-       Progress, 1846.
lent work, they regularly participated in religious organizations founded      Wikimedia.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
268                                                                         chapte r 10


             explicitly to address the spiritual mission at the core of evangelical Prot-
             estantism. In fact, for many reformers, it was actually the experience of
             evangelizing among the poor and seeing firsthand the rampant social is-
             sues plaguing life in the slums that first inspired them to get involved in be-
             nevolent reform projects. Modeling themselves on the British and Foreign
             Bible Society, formed in 1804 to spread Christian doctrine to the British
             working class, urban missionaries emphasized the importance of winning
             the world for Christ, one soul at a time. For example, the American Bible
             Society and the American Tract Society used the efficient new steam-pow-
             ered printing press to distribute Bibles and evangelizing religious tracts
             throughout the United States. For example, the New York Religious Tract
             Society alone managed to distribute religious tracts to all but 388 of New
             York City’s 28,383 families.21 In places like Boston, New York, and Phila-
             delphia, middle-class women also established groups specifically to can-
             vass neighborhoods and bring the gospel to lower-class “wards.”
                 Such evangelical missions extended well beyond the urban landscape,
             however. Stirred by nationalism and moral purpose, evangelicals labored
             to make sure the word of God reached far-flung settlers on the new
             American frontier. The American Bible Society distributed thousands of
             Bibles to frontier areas where churches and clergy were scarce, while the
             American Home Missionary Society provided substantial financial assis-
             tance to frontier congregations struggling to achieve self-sufficiency. Mis-
             sionaries worked to translate the Bible into Iroquois and other languages
             in order to more effectively evangelize Native American populations. As
             efficient printing technology and faster transportation facilitated new
             transatlantic and global connections, religious Americans also began to
             flex their missionary zeal on a global stage. In 1810, for example, Presby-
             terian and Congregationalist leaders established the American Board of
             Commissioners for Foreign Missions to evangelize in India, Africa, East
             Asia, and the Pacific.22
                 The potent combination of social reform and evangelical mission at
             the heart of the nineteenth century’s benevolent empire produced reform
             agendas and institutional changes that have reverberated through the
             twentieth and twenty-first centuries. By devoting their time to the moral
             uplift of their communities and the world at large, middle-class reform-
             ers created many of the largest and most influential organizations in the
             nation’s history. For the optimistic, religiously motivated American, no
             problem seemed too great to solve.
                 Difficulties arose, however, when the benevolent empire attempted
             to take up more explicitly political issues. The movement against Indian

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  269


removal was the first major example of this. Missionary work had first
brought the Cherokee Nation to the attention of northeastern evangelicals
in the early nineteenth century. Missionaries sent by the American Board
and other groups sought to introduce Christianity and American cultural
values to the Cherokee and celebrated when their efforts seemed to be met
with success. Evangelicals proclaimed that the Cherokee were becoming
“civilized,” which could be seen in their adoption of a written language
and of a constitution modeled on that of the U.S. government. Mission
supporters were shocked, then, when the election of Andrew Jackson
brought a new emphasis on the removal of Native Americans from the
land east of the Mississippi River. The Indian Removal Act of 1830 was
met with fierce opposition from within the affected Native American
communities as well as from the benevolent empire. Jeremiah Evarts, one
of the leaders of the American Board, wrote a series of essays under the
pen name William Penn urging Americans to oppose removal.23 He used
the religious and moral arguments of the mission movement but added a
new layer of politics in his extensive discussion of the history of treaty law
between the United States and Native Americans. This political shift was
even more evident when American missionaries challenged Georgia state
laws asserting sovereignty over Cherokee territory in the Supreme Court
Case Worcester v. Georgia.24 Although the case was successful, the federal
government did not enforce the Court’s decision, and Indian removal was
accomplished through the Trail of Tears, the tragic, forced removal of Na-
tive Americans to territories west of the Mississippi River.
     Anti-removal activism was also notable for the entry of ordinary
American women into political discourse. The first major petition cam-
paign by American women focused on opposition to removal and was led
(anonymously) by Catharine Beecher. Beecher was already a leader in the
movement to reform women’s education and came to her role in removal
through her connections to the mission movement. Inspired by a meet-
ing with Jeremiah Evarts, Beecher echoed his arguments from the Wil-
liam Penn letters in her appeal to American women.25 Beecher called on
women to petition the government to end the policy of Indian removal.
She used religious and moral arguments to justify women’s entry into po-
litical discussion when it concerned an obviously moral cause. This effort
was ultimately unsuccessful but still introduced the kinds of arguments
that paved the way for women’s political activism for abolitionism and
women’s rights. The divisions that the anti-removal campaign revealed
became more dramatic with the next political cause of nineteenth century
reformers: abolitionism.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
270                                                                       chapte r 10



             V. Antislavery and Abolitionism
             The revivalist doctrines of salvation, perfectionism, and disinterested be-
             nevolence led many evangelical reformers to believe that slavery was the
             most God-defying of all sins and the most terrible blight on the moral
             virtue of the United States. While white interest in and commitment
             to abolition had existed for several decades, organized antislavery ad-
             vocacy had been largely restricted to models of gradual emancipation
             (seen in several northern states following the American Revolution) and
             conditional emancipation (seen in colonization efforts to remove black
             Americans to settlements in Africa). The colonizationist movement of the
             early nineteenth century had drawn together a broad political spectrum
             of Americans with its promise of gradually ending slavery in the United
             States by removing the free black population from North America. By
             the 1830s, however, a rising tide of anticolonization sentiment among
             northern free black Americans and middle-class evangelicals’ flourishing
             commitment to social reform radicalized the movement. Baptists such
             as William Lloyd Garrison, Congregational revivalists like Arthur and
             Lewis Tappan and Theodore Dwight Weld, and radical Quakers includ-
             ing Lucretia Mott and John Greenleaf Whittier helped push the idea of
             immediate emancipation onto the center stage of northern reform agen-
             das. Inspired by a strategy known as “moral suasion,” these young abo-
             litionists believed they could convince slaveholders to voluntarily release
             their slaves by appealing to their sense of Christian conscience. The result
             would be national redemption and moral harmony.
                  William Lloyd Garrison’s early life and career famously illustrated
             this transition toward immediatism. As a young man immersed in the
             reform culture of antebellum Massachusetts, Garrison had fought slav-
             ery in the 1820s by advocating for both black colonization and gradual
             abolition. Fiery tracts penned by black northerners David Walker and
             James Forten, however, convinced Garrison that colonization was an
             inherently racist project and that African Americans possessed a hard-
             won right to the fruits of American liberty.26 So, in 1831, he established
             a newspaper called The Liberator, through which he organized and
             spearheaded an unprecedented interracial crusade dedicated to promot-
             ing immediate emancipation and black citizenship. Then, in 1833, Gar-
             rison presided as reformers from ten states came together to create the
             American Anti-Slavery Society. They rested their mission for immediate
             emancipation “upon the Declaration of our Independence, and upon the



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  271




truths of Divine Revelation,” binding their cause to both national and         The Libera-
                                                                               tor, April 17,
Christian redemption.27 Abolitionists fought to save slaves and their na-      1857. Masthead
tion’s soul.                                                                   designed by
    In order to accomplish their goals, abolitionists employed every           Hammatt Billings
                                                                               in 1850. Met-
method of outreach and agitation. At home in the North, abolitionists          ropolitan State
established hundreds of antislavery societies and worked with long-            University.

standing associations of black activists to establish schools, churches,
and voluntary associations. Women and men of all colors were encour-
aged to associate together in these spaces to combat what they termed
“color phobia.” Harnessing the potential of steam-powered printing and
mass communication, abolitionists also blanketed the free states with
pamphlets and antislavery newspapers. They blared their arguments
from lyceum podiums and broadsides. Prominent individuals such as
Wendell Phillips and Angelina Grimké saturated northern media with
shame-inducing exposés of northern complicity in the return of fugitive
slaves, and white reformers sentimentalized slave narratives that tugged
at middle-class heartstrings. Abolitionists used the U.S. Postal Service in
1835 to inundate southern slaveholders with calls to emancipate their
slaves in order to save their souls, and, in 1836, they prepared thou-
sands of petitions for Congress as part of the Great Petition Campaign. In
the six years from 1831 to 1837, abolitionist activities reached dizzying
heights.28
    However, such efforts encountered fierce opposition, as most Ameri-
cans did not share abolitionists’ particular brand of nationalism. In fact,
abolitionists remained a small, marginalized group detested by most
white Americans in both the North and the South. Immediatists were
attacked as the harbingers of disunion, rabble-rousers who would stir
up sectional tensions and thereby imperil the American experiment of



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
272                                                                       chapte r 10


             self-government. Particularly troubling to some observers was the public
             engagement of women as abolitionist speakers and activists. Fearful of
             disunion and outraged by the interracial nature of abolitionism, northern
             mobs smashed abolitionist printing presses and even killed a prominent
             antislavery newspaper editor named Elijah Lovejoy. White southerners,
             believing that abolitionists had incited Nat Turner’s rebellion in 1831,
             aggressively purged antislavery dissent from the region. Violent harass-
             ment threatened abolitionists’ personal safety. In Congress, Whigs and
             Democrats joined forces in 1836 to pass an unprecedented restriction
             on freedom of political expression known as the gag rule, prohibiting
             all discussion of abolitionist petitions in the House of Representatives.
             Two years later, mobs attacked the Anti-Slavery Convention of American
             Women, throwing rocks through the windows and burning the newly
             constructed Pennsylvania Hall to the ground.29
                 In the face of such substantial external opposition, the abolitionist
             movement began to splinter. In 1839, an ideological schism shook the
             foundations of organized antislavery. Moral suasionists, led most promi-
             nently by William Lloyd Garrison, felt that the U.S. Constitution was a
             fundamentally pro-slavery document, and that the present political sys-
             tem was irredeemable. They dedicated their efforts exclusively toward
             persuading the public to redeem the nation by reestablishing it on anti-
             slavery grounds. However, many abolitionists, reeling from the level of
             entrenched opposition met in the 1830s, began to feel that moral suasion
             was no longer realistic. Instead, they believed, abolition would have to
             be effected through existing political processes. So, in 1839, political
             abolitionists formed the Liberty Party under the leadership of James G.
             Birney. This new abolitionist society was predicated on the belief that
             the U.S. Constitution was actually an antislavery document that could
             be used to abolish the stain of slavery through the national political
             system.30
                 Women’s rights, too, divided abolitionists. Many abolitionists who be-
             lieved full-heartedly in moral suasion nonetheless felt compelled to leave
             the American Anti-Slavery Society because, in part, it elevated women to
             leadership positions and endorsed women’s suffrage. This question came
             to a head when, in 1840, Abby Kelly was elected to the business commit-
             tee of the society. The elevation of women to full leadership roles was too
             much for some conservative members who saw this as evidence that the
             society had lost sight of its most important goal. Under the leadership of
             Arthur Tappan, they left to form the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  273


Society. These disputes became so bitter and acrimonious that former
friends cut social ties and traded public insults.
    Another significant shift stemmed from the disappointments of the
1830s. Abolitionists in the 1840s increasingly moved from agendas based
on reform to agendas based on resistance. Moral suasionists continued to
appeal to hearts and minds, and political abolitionists launched sustained
campaigns to bring abolitionist agendas to the ballot box. Meanwhile the
entrenched and violent opposition of both slaveholders and the northern
public encouraged abolitionists to find other avenues of fighting the slave
power. Increasingly, for example, abolitionists aided runaway slaves es-
tablished international antislavery networks to pressure the United States
to abolish slavery. Frederick Douglass represented the intersection of
these two trends. After escaping from slavery, Douglass came to the fore
of the abolitionist movement as a naturally gifted orator and a powerful
narrator of his experiences in slavery. His first autobiography, published
in 1845, was so widely read that it was reprinted in nine editions and
translated into several languages.31 Douglass traveled to Great Britain
in 1845 and met with famous British abolitionists like Thomas Clark-
son, drumming up moral and financial support from British and Irish




                                                       Frederick Douglass was perhaps the most
                                                       famous African American abolitionist,
                                                       fighting tirelessly not only for the end of
                                                       slavery but for equal rights of all American
                                                       citizens. This copy of a daguerreotype shows
                                                       him as a young man, around age twenty-
                                                       nine and soon after his self-emancipation.
                                                       Print, c. 1850 after c. 1847 daguerreotype.
                                                       Wikimedia.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
274                                                                       chapte r 10


             a­ ntislavery societies. He was neither the first nor the last runaway slave
              to make this voyage, but his great success abroad contributed signifi-
              cantly to rousing morale among weary abolitionists at home.
                  The model of resistance to the slave power only became more pro-
              nounced after 1850, when a long-standing Fugitive Slave Act was given
              new teeth. Though a legal mandate to return runway slaves had existed in
              U.S. federal law since 1793, the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 upped the ante
              by harshly penalizing officials who failed to arrest runaways and private
              citizens who tried to help them. This law, coupled with growing concern
              over the possibility that slavery would be allowed in Kansas when it was
              admitted as a state, made the 1850s a highly volatile and violent period of
              American antislavery. Reform took a backseat as armed mobs protected
              runaway slaves in the North and fortified abolitionists engaged in bloody
              skirmishes in the West. Culminating in John Brown’s raid on Harper’s
              Ferry, the violence of the 1850s convinced many Americans that the issue
              of slavery was pushing the nation to the brink of sectional cataclysm. After
              two decades of immediatist agitation, the idealism of revivalist perfection-
              ism had given way to a protracted battle for the moral soul of the country.
                  For all of the problems that abolitionism faced, the movement was
              far from a failure. The prominence of African Americans in abolition-
              ist organizations offered a powerful, if imperfect, model of interracial
              coexistence. While immediatists always remained a minority, their ef-
              forts paved the way for the moderately antislavery Republican Party to
              gain traction in the years preceding the Civil War. It is hard to imagine
              that Abraham Lincoln could have become president in 1860 without the
              ground prepared by antislavery advocates and without the presence of
              radical abolitionists against whom he could be cast as a moderate al-
              ternative. Though it ultimately took a civil war to break the bonds of
              slavery in the United States, the evangelical moral compass of revivalist
              Protestantism provided motivation for the embattled abolitionists.


             VI. Women’s Rights in Antebellum America
             In the era of revivalism and reform, Americans understood the family
             and home as the hearthstones of civic virtue and moral influence. This
             increasingly confined middle-class white women to the domestic sphere,
             where they were responsible for educating children and maintaining
             household virtue. Yet women took the very ideology that defined their
             place in the home and managed to use it to fashion a public role for them-



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  275


selves. As a result, women actually became more visible and active in the
public sphere than ever before. The influence of the Second Great Awak-
ening, coupled with new educational opportunities available to girls and
young women, enabled white middle-class women to leave their homes
en masse, joining and forming societies dedicated to everything from lit-
erary interests to the antislavery movement.
    In the early nineteenth century, the dominant understanding of gender
claimed that women were the guardians of virtue and the spiritual heads
of the home. Women were expected to be pious, pure, submissive, and
domestic, and to pass these virtues on to their children. Historians have
described these expectations as the “Cult of Domesticity,” or the “Cult
of True Womanhood,” and they developed in tandem with industrializa-
tion, the market revolution, and the Second Great Awakening.32 These
economic and religious transformations increasingly seemed to divide the
world into the public space of work and politics and the domestic space
of leisure and morality. Voluntary work related to labor laws, prison re-
form, and antislavery applied women’s roles as guardians of moral virtue
to address all forms of social issues that they felt contributed to the moral
decline of society. In spite of this apparent valuation of women’s position
in society, there were clear limitations. Under the terms of coverture, men
gained legal control over their wives’ property, and women with children
had no legal rights over their offspring. Additionally, women could not
initiate divorce, make wills, sign contracts, or vote.
    Female education provides an example of the great strides made by
and for women during the antebellum period. As part of a larger edu-
cation reform movement in the early republic, several female reformers
worked tirelessly to increase women’s access to education. They argued
that if women were to take charge of the education of their children, they
needed to be well educated themselves. While the women’s education
movement did not generally push for women’s political or social equal-
ity, it did assert women’s intellectual equality with men, an idea that
would eventually have important effects. Educators such as Emma Wil-
lard, Catharine Beecher, and Mary Lyons (founders of the Troy Female
Seminary, Hartford Female Seminary, and Mount Holyoke Seminary,
respectively) adopted the same rigorous curriculum that was used for
boys. Many of these schools had the particular goal of training women to
be teachers. Many graduates of these prominent seminaries would found
their own schools, spreading women’s education across the country, and
with it ideas about women’s potential to take part in public life.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
276                                                                        chapte r 10


                 The abolitionist movement was another important school for wom-
             en’s public engagement. Many of the earliest women’s rights advocates
             began their activism by fighting the injustices of slavery, including Ange-
             lina and Sarah Grimké, Lucretia Mott, Sojourner Truth, Elizabeth Cady
             Stanton, and Susan B. Anthony. In the 1830s, women in cities such as
             Boston, New York, and Philadelphia established female societies dedi-
             cated to the antislavery cause. Initially, these societies were similar to the
             prayer and fund-raising-based projects of other reform societies. As such
             societies proliferated, however, their strategies changed. Women could
             not vote, for example, but they increasingly used their right to petition
             to express their antislavery grievances to the government. Impassioned
             women like the Grimké sisters even began to travel on lecture circuits.
             This latter strategy, born of fervent antislavery advocacy, ultimately teth-
             ered the cause of women’s rights to abolitionism.
                 Sarah Moore Grimké and Angelina Emily Grimké were born to a
             wealthy family in Charleston, South Carolina, where they witnessed the
             horrors of slavery firsthand. Repulsed by the treatment of the slaves on
             the Grimké plantation, they decided to support the antislavery movement
             by sharing their experiences on northern lecture tours. At first speaking
             to female audiences, they soon attracted “promiscuous” crowds of both
             men and women. They were among the earliest and most famous Ameri-
             can women to take such a public role in the name of reform. When the
             Grimké sisters met substantial harassment and opposition to their public
             speaking on antislavery, they were inspired to speak out against more
             than the slave system. They began to see that they would need to fight for
             women’s rights in order to fight for the rights of slaves.33 Other female
             abolitionists soon joined them in linking the issues of women’s rights and
             abolitionism by drawing direct comparisons between the condition of
             free women in the United States and the condition of the slave.
                 As the antislavery movement gained momentum in northern states in
             the 1830s and 1840s, so too did efforts for women’s rights. These efforts
             came to a head at an event that took place in London in 1840. That year,
             Lucretia Mott was among the American delegates attending the World
             Anti-Slavery Convention in London. Because of ideological disagree-
             ments between some of the abolitionists, the convention’s organizers
             refused to seat the female delegates or allow them to vote during the pro-
             ceedings. Angered by such treatment, Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
             whose husband was also a delegate, returned to the United States with a
             renewed interest in pursuing women’s rights. In 1848, they organized the



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  277




                                                       Lucretia Mott campaigned for women’s
                                                       rights, abolition, and equality in the United
                                                       States. Joseph Kyle (artist), Lucretia Mott,
                                                       1842. Wikimedia.




Seneca Falls Convention, a two-day summit in New York state in which
women’s rights advocates came together to discuss the problems facing
women.
    Stanton wrote the Declaration of Sentiments for the Seneca Falls
Convention to capture the wide range of issues embraced by the early
women’s rights movement. She modeled the document on the Declara-
tion of Independence to make explicit the connection between women’s
liberty and the rhetoric of America’s founding. The Declaration of Senti-
ments outlined fifteen grievances and eleven resolutions. They champi-
oned property rights, access to the professions, and, most controversially,
the right to vote. Sixty-eight women and thirty-two men, all of whom
were already involved in some aspect of reform, signed the Declaration
of Sentiments.34
    Antebellum women’s rights fought what they perceived as sense-
less gender discrimination, such as the barring of women from college
and inferior pay for female teachers. They also argued that men and
women should be held to the same moral standards. The Seneca Falls
Convention was the first of many such gatherings promoting women’s
rights, held almost exclusively in the northern states. Yet the women’s



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
278                                                                         chapte r 10


             rights movement grew slowly and experienced few victories. Few states
             reformed married women’s property laws before the Civil War, and no
             state was prepared to offer women the right to vote during the ante-
             bellum period. At the onset of the Civil War, women’s rights advocates
             temporarily threw the bulk of their support behind abolition, allowing
             the cause of racial equality to temporarily trump that of gender equal-
             ity. But the words of the Seneca Falls convention continued to inspire
             generations of activists.


             VII. Conclusion
             By the time civil war erupted in 1861, the revival and reform movements
             of the antebellum period had made an indelible mark on the American
             landscape. The Second Great Awakening ignited Protestant spirits by
             connecting evangelical Christians in national networks of faith. Social
             reform spurred members of the middle class to promote national moral-
             ity and the public good. Not all reform projects were equally success-
             ful, however. While the temperance movement made substantial inroads
             against the excesses of alcohol consumption, the abolitionist movement
             proved so divisive that it paved the way for sectional crisis. Yet participa-
             tion in reform movements, regardless of their ultimate success, encour-
             aged many Americans to see themselves in new ways. Black activists
             became a powerful voice in antislavery societies, for example, developing
             domestic and transnational connections to pursue the cause of liberty.
             Middle-class women’s dominant presence in the benevolent empire en-
             couraged them to pursue a full-fledged women’s right movement that
             has lasted in various forms up through the present day. In their efforts
             to make the United States a more virtuous and moral nation, nineteenth-
             century reform activists developed cultural and institutional foundations
             for social change that have continued to reverberate through the twenti-
             eth and twenty-first centuries.


             VIII. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Emily Conroy-Krutz, with content contributions by
             Elena Abbott, Cameron Blevins, Frank Cirillo, Justin Clark, Emily Conroy-Krutz,
             Nicolas Hoffmann, Christopher C. Jones, Jonathan Koefoed, Charles McCrary,
             William E. Skidmore, Megan Stanton, Kelly Weber, and Ben Wright.
                 Recommended citation: Elena Abbott et al., “Religion and Reform,” Emily
             Conroy-Krutz, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright
             (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  279



N o t e s t o C h a p t e r 10
     1. Sam Haselby, The Origins of American Religious Nationalism (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 170.
     2. Leigh Eric Schmidt, Holy Fairs: Scotland and the Making of American
Revivalism (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2001).
     3. John B. Boles, The Great Revival: The Origins of the Southern Evangelical
Mind (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1972).
     4. Charles G. Finney, Memoirs of Charles G. Finney (New York: Revell,
1876), 78.
     5. John H. Wigger, Taking Heaven by Storm: Methodism and the Rise of
Popular Christianity in America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 3,
197–200, 201n1.
     6. Gary J. Dorrien, The Making of American Liberal Theology: Imagining
Progressive Religion, 1805–1900, Volume 1 (Louisville, KY: Westminster John
Knox Press, 2001), 119.
     7. David Edwin Harrell, A Social History of the Disciples Christ: Quest for a
Christian America, 1800–1865 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1966).
     8. Joseph Smith, “History, 1838–1856, volume A-1, 23 December 1805–
30 August 1834,” Joseph Smith Papers. http://​                 josephsmithpapers​.org/​
                                                                                      paper​
Summary/​history​-1838​-1856​-volume​-a​-1​-23​-december​-1805​-30​-august​-1834,
accessed July 8, 2015.
     9. Philip F. Gura, American Transcendentalism: A History (New York: Hill
and Wang, 2008), 5.
     10. Ralph Waldo Emerson, “The American Scholar.” http://​digitalemerson​
.wsulibs​.wsu​.edu/​exhibits/​show/​text/​the​-american​-scholar, accessed May 6, 2018;
Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Self Reliance,” in Essays, First Series. http://​digitalemerson​
.wsulibs​.wsu​.edu/​exhibits/​show/​text/​first​-series/​self​-reliance, accessed May 6,
2018.
     11. Henry David Thoreau, Walden, and On the Duty of Civil Disobedience.
http://​www​.gutenberg​.org/​files/​205/​205​-h/​205​-h​.htm, accessed May 6, 2018.
     12. Sterling F. Delano, Brook Farm: The Dark Side of Utopia (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
     13. Robert A. Gross and Mary Kelley, eds., A History of the Book in Amer-
ica: Volume 2: An Extensive Republic: Print Culture, and Society in the New Na-
tion, 1790–1840 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010), 112.
     14. Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an
American Slave, Written by Himself (Boston: Anti-Slavery Office, 1845). http://​
docsouth​.unc​.edu/​neh/​douglass/​douglass​.html.
     15. Christopher Leslie Brown, Moral Capital: Foundations of British Aboli-
tionism (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012).
     16. David Brion Davis, “The Emergence of Immediatism in British and
American Antislavery Thought,” Journal of American History 49, no. 2 (Septem-
ber 1962): 209–230.
     17. Lori D. Ginzberg, Women and the Work of Benevolence: Morality, Poli-
tics, and Class in the Nineteenth Century (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1990).

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
280                                                                            chapte r 10


                  18. Michael P. Young, Bearing Witness Against Sin: The Evangelical Birth of the
             American Social Movement (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006), 74–75.
                  19. Milton A. Maxwell, “Washingtonian Movement,” Quarterly Journal of
             Studies on Alcohol 11 (1950): 410.
                  20. Jack S. Blocker, American Temperance Movements: Cycles of Reform
             (Boston: Hall, 1989).
                  21. David Paul Nord, Faith in Reading: Religious Publishing and the Birth of
             Mass Media in America (New York: Oxford University Press, 222), 85.
                  22. Emily Conroy-Krutz, Christian Imperialism: Converting the World in the
             Early American Republic (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2015).
                  23. Jeremiah Evarts, Essays on the Present Crisis in the Condition of the
             American Indians: First Published in the National Intelligencer, Under the Signa-
             ture of William Penn (Boston: Perkins and Marvin, 1829). http://​eco​.canadiana​
             .ca/​view/​oocihm​.51209/​3​?r​=​0​&​s​=​1.
                  24. Worcester v. Georgia (1832). https://​www​.law​.cornell​.edu/​supremecourt​
             /text/​31/​515.
                  25. Catharine Beecher, “Circular Addressed to the Benevolent Ladies of the
             U. States,” December 25, 1829, in Theda Purdue and Michael D. Green, eds.,
             The Cherokee Removal: A Brief History with Documents, 2nd ed. (Boston: Bed-
             ford St. Martin’s, 2005), 111–114.
                  26. See, for example, David Walker, Walker’s Appeal (Boston: Walker, 1829)
             and James Forten, Letters from A Man of Colour (Philadelphia: s.n., 1813).
                  27. Paul Goodman, Of One Blood: Abolitionism and the Origins of Racial
             Equality (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 105.
                  28. James Brewer Stewart, Abolitionist Politics and the Coming of the Civil
             War (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2008), 13–14.
                  29. Beverly C. Tomek, Pennsylvania Hall: A “Legal Lynching” in the Shadow
             of the Liberty Bell (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013).
                  30. Reinhard O. Johnson, The Liberty Party, 1840–1848: Antislavery Third-
             Party Politics in the United States (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2009).
                  31. Philip Gould, “The Rise, Development, and Circulation of the Slave Nar-
             rative,” in The Cambridge Companion to the African American Slave Narrative,
             ed. Audrey Fisch (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 24.
                  32. Barbara Welter, “The Cult of True Womanhood: 1820–1860,” American
             Quarterly 18, no. 2 (1966): 151–174.
                  33. Gerda Lerner, The Grimké Sisters from South Carolina: Pioneers for Wom-
             en’s Rights and Abolition (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009).
                  34. “Declaration of Sentiments,” in Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. An-
             thony, and Matilda Joslyn Gage, History of Woman Suffrage, vol. 1 (Roches-
             ter, NY: Fowler and Wells, 1889), 70–71. http://​legacy​.fordham​.edu/​halsall/​mod​
             /senecafalls​.asp.

             R e c o m m e n d e d R e a di n g
             Berg, Barbara J. The Remembered Gates: Origins of American Feminism, The
                 Woman and the City 1800–1860. New York: Oxford University Press, 1978.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re l i g ion a n d R e f o r m  281


Boylan, Anne. The Origins of Women’s Activism: New York and Boston, 1797–
      1840. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Brekus, Catherine A. Strangers and Pilgrims: Female Preaching in America,
      1740–1845. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998.
Conroy-Krutz, Emily. Christian Imperialism: Converting the World in the Early
      American Republic. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2015.
Dorsey, Bruce. Reforming Men and Women: Gender in the Antebellum City.
      Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002.
DuBois, Ellen. Feminism and Suffrage: The Emergence of an Independent
      ­Women’s Movement in America, 1848–1869. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
       sity Press, 1999.
Ginzberg, Lori D. Untidy Origins: A Story of Woman’s Rights in Antebellum
       New York. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Ginzberg, Lori. Women and the Work of Benevolence: Morality, Politics, and
       Class in the 19th Century United States. New Haven, CT: Yale University
       Press, 1990.
Hatch, Nathan O. The Democratization of American Christianity. New Haven,
       CT: Yale University Press, 1989.
Haynes, April R. Riotous Flesh: Women, Physiology, and the Solitary Vice in
       Nineteenth Century America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Hempton, David. Methodism: Empire of the Spirit. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
       versity Press, 2005.
Hewitt, Nancy. Women’s Activism and Social Change: Rochester, New York
       1822–1872. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1984.
Jeffrey, Julie Roy. The Great Silent Army of Abolitionism: Ordinary Women in
     the Antislavery Movement. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
     1998.
Johnson, Paul. A Shopkeepers Millennium: Society and Revivals in Rochester,
     New York, 1815–1837. New York: Hill and Wang, 2004.
Juster, Susan. Disorderly Women: Sexual Politics and Evangelicalism in Revolu-
     tionary New England. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994.
Lerner, Gerda. The Grimké Sisters from South Carolina: Pioneers for
     ­Women’s Rights and Abolition. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
     Press, 2009.
Makdisi, Ussama. Artillery of Heaven: American Missionaries and the Failed
     Conversion of the Middle East. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2008.
McDaniel, W. Caleb. The Problem of Democracy in the Age of Slavery: Garriso-
     nian Abolitionists and Transatlantic Reform. Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2013.
Muncy, Raymond Lee. Sex and Marriage in Utopian Communities: 19th Century
     America. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1973.
Newman, Richard S., The Transformation of American Abolitionism: Fighting
     Slavery in the Early Republic. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
     Press, 2002.
Ryan, Mary P. Cradle of the Middle Class: The Family in Oneida County, New
     York, 1790–1865. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
282                                                                        chapte r 10


             Ryan, Susan M. The Grammar of Good Intentions: Race and the Antebellum
                 Culture of Benevolence. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2003.
             Sinha, Manisha. The Slave’s Cause: A History of Abolition. New Haven, CT: Yale
                 University Press, 2016.
             Stewart, James Brewer. Holy Warriors: The Abolitionists and American Slavery.
                 New York: Hill and Wang, 1996.
             Tomek, Beverly C. Colonization and Its Discontents: Emancipation, Emigration,
                 and Antislavery in Antebellum Pennsylvania. New York: New York Univer-
                 sity Press, 2011.
             Walters, Ronald. American Reformers, 1815–1860. New York: Hill and Wang,
                 1997.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
11
The Cotton Revolution

I. Introduction
In the decades leading up to the Civil War, the southern states experienced      Eyre Crowe,
                                                                                 Slaves Waiting for
extraordinary change that would define the region and its role in Ameri-         Sale, Richmond,
can history for decades, even centuries, to come. Between the 1830s and          Virginia, 1861.
the beginning of the Civil War in 1861, the American South expanded              University of Vir-
                                                                                 ginia, The Atlantic
its wealth and population and became an integral part of an increasingly         Slave Trade and
global economy. It did not, as previous generations of histories have told,      Slave Life in the
                                                                                 Americas.
sit back on its cultural and social traditions and insulate itself from an ex-

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 8 4 chapt er 11


        panding system of communication, trade, and production that connected
        Europe and Asia to the Americas. Quite the opposite; the South actively
        engaged new technologies and trade routes while also seeking to assimilate
        and upgrade its most “traditional” and culturally ingrained practices—
        such as slavery and agricultural production—within a modernizing world.
            Beginning in the 1830s, merchants from the Northeast, Europe, Can-
        ada, Mexico, and the Caribbean flocked to southern cities, setting up
        trading firms, warehouses, ports, and markets. As a result, these cities—
        Richmond, Charleston, St. Louis, Mobile, Savannah, and New Orleans,
        to name a few—doubled and even tripled in size and global importance.
        Populations became more cosmopolitan, more educated, and wealth-
        ier. Systems of class—lower-, middle-, and upper-class communities—­
        developed where they had never clearly existed. Ports that had once
        focused entirely on the importation of slaves and shipped only region-
        ally became home to daily and weekly shipping lines to New York City,
        Liverpool, Manchester, Le Havre, and Lisbon. The world was slowly but
        surely coming closer together, and the South was right in the middle.


        II. The Importance of Cotton
         In November 1785, the Liverpool firm of Peel, Yates & Co. imported the
         first seven bales of American cotton ever to arrive in Europe. Prior to this
         unscheduled, and frankly unwanted, delivery, European merchants saw
         cotton as a product of the colonial Caribbean islands of Barbados, Saint-
         Domingue (now Haiti), Martinique, Cuba, and Jamaica. The American
         South, though relatively wide and expansive, was the go-to source for
         rice and, most importantly, tobacco.
             Few knew that the seven bales sitting in Liverpool that winter of 1785
         would change the world. But they did. By the early 1800s, the Ameri-
         can South had developed a niche in the European market for “luxurious”
         long-staple cotton grown exclusively on the Sea Islands off the coast of
         South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida.1 But this was only the beginning of
        a massive flood to come and the foundation of the South’s astronomical
        rise to global prominence. Before long, botanists, merchants, and planters
        alike set out to develop strains of cotton seed that would grow farther west
        on the southern mainland, especially in the new lands opened up by the
        Louisiana Purchase of 1803—an area that stretched from New Orleans in
        the South to what is today Minnesota, parts of the Dakotas, and Montana.
             The discovery of Gossypium barbadense—often called Petit Gulf
        ­cotton—near Rodney, Mississippi, in 1820 changed the American and

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  285


global cotton markets forever.2 Petit Gulf, it was said, slid through the
cotton gin—a machine developed by Eli Whitney in 1794 for deseeding
cotton—more easily than any other strain. It also grew tightly, producing
more usable cotton than anyone had imagined to that point. Perhaps most
importantly, though, it came up at a time when Native peoples were re-
moved from the Southwest—southern Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and
northern Louisiana. After Indian removal, land became readily available
for white men with a few dollars and big dreams. Throughout the 1820s
and 1830s, the federal government implemented several forced migrations
of Native Americans, establishing a system of reservations west of the
Mississippi River on which all eastern peoples were required to relocate
and settle. This system, enacted through the Indian Removal Act of 1830,
allowed the federal government to survey, divide, and auction off millions
of acres of land for however much bidders were willing to pay. Suddenly,
farmers with dreams of owning a large plantation could purchase dozens,
even hundreds, of acres in the fertile Mississippi River Delta for cents on
the dollar. Pieces of land that would cost thousands of dollars elsewhere
sold in the 1830s for several hundred, at prices as low as 40¢ per acre.3
    Thousands rushed into the Cotton Belt. Joseph Holt Ingraham, a
writer and traveler from Maine, called it a “mania.”4 William Henry




                                                    Eli Whitney’s mechanical cotton gin revolu-
                                                    tionized cotton production and expanded and
                                                    strengthened slavery throughout the South. Eli
                                                    Whitney’s patent for the cotton gin, March 14,
                                                    1794; Records of the Patent and Trademark Of-
                                                    fice; Record Group 241. Wikimedia.


         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 8 6 chapt er 11




A nineteenth-­       Sparks, a lawyer living in Natchez, Mississippi, remembered it as “a new
century cotton gin
on display at the
                     El Dorado” in which “fortunes were made in a day, without enterprise
Eli Whitney Mu-      or work.” The change was astonishing. “Where yesterday the wilder-
seum. Wikimedia.     ness darkened over the land with her wild forests,” he recalled, “to-day
                     the cotton plantations whitened the earth.”5 Money flowed from banks,
                     many newly formed, on promises of “other-worldly” profits and over-
                     night returns. Banks in New York City, Baltimore, Philadelphia, and
                     even London offered lines of credit to anyone looking to buy land in the
                     Southwest. Some even sent their own agents to purchase cheap land at
                     auction for the express purpose of selling it, sometimes the very next day,
                     at double and triple the original value, a process known as speculation.
                         The explosion of available land in the fertile Cotton Belt brought
                     new life to the South. By the end of the 1830s, Petit Gulf cotton had
                     been perfected, distributed, and planted throughout the region. Advances
                     in steam power and water travel revolutionized southern farmers’ and
                     planters’ ability to deseed and bundle their products and move them to
                     ports popping up along the Atlantic seaboard. Indeed, by the end of the
                     1830s, cotton had become the primary crop not only of the southwestern
                     states but of the entire nation.
                         The numbers were staggering. In 1793, just a few years after the first,
                     albeit unintentional, shipment of American cotton to Europe, the South

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  287


produced around five million pounds of cotton, again almost exclusively
the product of South Carolina’s Sea Islands. Seven years later, in 1800,
South Carolina remained the primary cotton producer in the South, send-
ing 6.5 million pounds of the luxurious long-staple blend to markets in
Charleston, Liverpool, London, and New York.6 But as the tighter, more
abundant, and vibrant Petit Gulf strain moved west with the dream-
ers, schemers, and speculators, the American South quickly became the
world’s leading cotton producer. By 1835, the five main cotton-growing
states—South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana—
produced more than five hundred million pounds of Petit Gulf for a global
market stretching from New Orleans to New York and to London, Liver-
pool, Paris and beyond. That five hundred million pounds of cotton made
up nearly 55 percent of the entire United States export market, a trend
that continued nearly every year until the outbreak of the Civil War. In-
deed, the two billion pounds of cotton produced in 1860 alone amounted
to more than 60 percent of the United States’ total exports for that year.7
    The astronomical rise of American cotton production came at the
cost of the South’s first staple crop—tobacco. Perfected in Virginia but
grown and sold in nearly every southern territory and state, tobacco
served as the South’s main economic commodity for more than a century.
But tobacco was a rough crop. It treated the land poorly, draining the
soil of nutrients. Tobacco fields did not last forever. In fact, fields rarely
survived more than four or five cycles of growth, which left them dried
and barren, incapable of growing much more than patches of grass. Of
course, tobacco is, and was, an addictive substance, but because of its
violent pattern of growth, farmers had to move around, purchasing new
lands, developing new methods of production, and even creating new
fields through deforestation and westward expansion. Tobacco, then,
was expensive to produce—and not only because of the ubiquitous use
of slave labor. It required massive, temporary fields, large numbers of
slaves and laborers, and constant movement.
    Cotton was different, and it arrived at a time best suited for its suc-
cess. Petit Gulf cotton, in particular, grew relatively quickly on cheap,
widely available land. With the invention of the cotton gin in 1794, and
the emergence of steam power three decades later, cotton became the
common person’s commodity, the product with which the United States
could expand westward, producing and reproducing Thomas Jefferson’s
vision of an idyllic republic of small farmers—a nation in control of its
land, reaping the benefits of honest, free, and self-reliant work, a nation
of families and farmers, expansion and settlement. But this all came at a

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 8 8 chapt er 11




This map, published by the U.S. Coast Guard, shows the percentage of slaves in the population in each
county of the slave-holding states in 1860. The highest percentages lie along the Mississippi River, in the
“Black Belt” of Alabama, and in coastal South Carolina, all of which were centers of agricultural produc-
tion (cotton and rice) in the United States. E. Hergesheimer (cartographer) and Th. Leonhardt (engraver),
Map Showing the Distribution of the Slave Population of the Southern States of the United States Compiled
from the Census of 1860, c. 1861. Wikimedia.


                      violent cost. With the democratization of land ownership through Indian
                      removal, federal auctions, readily available credit, and the seemingly uni-
                      versal dream of cotton’s immediate profit, one of the South’s lasting tra-
                      ditions became normalized and engrained. And by the 1860s, that very
                      tradition, seen as the backbone of southern society and culture, would
                      split the nation in two. The heyday of American slavery had arrived.


                      III. Cotton and Slavery
                      The rise of cotton and the resulting upsurge in the United States’ global
                      position wed the South to slavery. Without slavery there could be no Cot-
                      ton Kingdom, no massive production of raw materials stretching across

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  289


thousands of acres worth millions of dollars. Indeed, cotton grew along-
side slavery. The two moved hand-in-hand. The existence of slavery and
its importance to the southern economy became the defining factor in what
would be known as the Slave South. Although slavery arrived in the Ameri-
cas long before cotton became a profitable commodity, the use and purchase
of slaves, the moralistic and economic justifications for the continuation of
slavery, and even the urgency to protect the practice from extinction before
the Civil War all received new life from the rise of cotton and the economic,
social, and cultural growth spurt that accompanied its success.
     Slavery had existed in the South since at least 1619, when a group
of Dutch traders arrived at Jamestown with twenty Africans. Although
these Africans remained under the ambiguous legal status of “unfree”
rather than being actual slaves, their arrival set in motion a practice that
would stretch across the entire continent over the next two centuries.
Slavery was everywhere by the time the American Revolution created
the United States, although northern states began a process of gradually
abolishing the practice soon thereafter. In the more rural, agrarian South,
slavery became a way of life, especially as farmers expanded their lands,
planted more crops, and entered the international trade market. By 1790,
two years after the ratification of the Constitution, 654,121 slaves lived
in the South—then just Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Caro-
lina, Georgia, and the Southwest Territory (now Tennessee). Just twenty




Though taken after the end of slavery, these stereographs show various stages of cotton production. The
fluffy white staple fiber is first extracted from the boll (a prickly, sharp protective capsule), after which the
seed is separated in the ginning and taken to a storehouse. Unknown, Picking cotton in a great plantation
in North Carolina, U.S.A., c. 1865–1903. New York Public Library Digital Collections.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 9 0 chapt er 11


        years later, in 1810, that number had increased to more than 1.1 million
        individuals in bondage.8
            The massive change in the South’s enslaved population between 1790
        and 1810 makes historical sense. During that time, the South advanced
        from a region of four states and one rather small territory to a region of
        six states (Virginia, North and South Carolina, Georgia, Kentucky, and
        Tennessee) and three rather large territories (Mississippi, Louisiana, and
        Orleans). The free population of the South also nearly doubled over that
        period—from around 1.3 million in 1790 to more than 2.3 million in
        1810. The enslaved population of the South did not increase at any rapid
        rate over the next two decades, until the cotton boom took hold in the
        mid-1830s. Indeed, following the constitutional ban on the international
        slave trade in 1808, the number of slaves in the South increased by just
        750,000 in twenty years.
            But then cotton came, and grew, and changed everything. Over the
        course of the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s, slavery became so endemic to the
        Cotton Belt that travelers, writers, and statisticians began referring to
        the area as the Black Belt, not only to describe the color of the rich land
        but also to describe the skin color of those forced to work its fields, line
        its docks, and move its products.
            Perhaps the most important aspect of southern slavery during this
        so-called Cotton Revolution was the value placed on both the work and
        the body of the slaves themselves. Once the fever of the initial land rush
        subsided, land values became more static and credit less free-flowing. For
        Mississippi land that in 1835 cost no more than $600, a farmer or inves-
        tor would have to shell out more than $3,000 in 1850. By 1860, that
        same land, depending on its record of production and location, could
        cost as much as $100,000.9 In many cases, cotton growers, especially
        planters with large lots and enslaved workforces, put up slaves as col-
        lateral for funds dedicated to buying more land. If that land, for one rea-
        son or another, be it weevils, a late freeze, or a simple lack of nutrients,
        did not produce a viable crop within a year, the planter would lose not
        only the new land but also the slaves he or she put up as a guarantee of
        payment.
            So much went into the production of cotton, the expansion of land,
        and the maintenance of enslaved workforces that by the 1850s, nearly
        every ounce of credit offered by southern, and even northern, banks
        dealt directly with some aspect of the cotton market. Millions of dollars
        changed hands. Slaves, the literal and figurative backbone of the southern



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  291




The slave markets of the South varied in size and style, but the St. Louis Exchange in New Orleans was
so frequently described that it became a kind of representation for all southern slave markets. Indeed, the
St. Louis Hotel rotunda was cemented in the literary imagination of nineteenth-century Americans after
Harriet Beecher Stowe chose it as the site for the sale of Uncle Tom in her 1852 novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
After the ruin of the St. Clare plantation, Tom and his fellow slaves were suddenly property that had to be
liquidated. Brought to New Orleans to be sold to the highest bidder, Tom found himself “beneath a splen-
did dome” where “men of all nations” scurried about. J. M. Starling (engraver), Sale of estates, pictures
and slaves in the rotunda, New Orleans, 1842. Wikimedia.


cotton economy, served as the highest and most important expense for
any successful cotton grower. Prices for slaves varied drastically, depend-
ing on skin color, sex, age, and location, both of purchase and birth. In
Virginia in the 1820s, for example, a single female slave of childbearing
age sold for an average of $300; an unskilled man above age eighteen
sold for around $450; and boys and girls below age thirteen sold for
between $100 and $150.10
    By the 1840s and into the 1850s, prices had nearly doubled—a result
of both standard inflation and the increasing importance of enslaved la-
borers in the cotton market. In 1845, “plow boys” under age eighteen
sold for more than $600 in some areas, measured at “five or six dollars
per pound.”11 “Prime field hands,” as they were called by merchants and



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 9 2 chapt er 11


        traders, averaged $1,600 at market by 1850, a figure that fell in line with
        the rising prices of the cotton they picked. For example, when cotton sat
        at 7¢ per pound in 1838, the average “field hand” cost around $700. As
        the price of cotton increased to 9¢, 10¢, then 11¢ per pound over the
        next ten years, the average cost of an enslaved male laborer likewise rose
        to $775, $900, and then more than $1,600.12
            The key is that cotton and slaves helped define each other, at least
        in the cotton South. By the 1850s, slavery and cotton had become so
        intertwined that the very idea of change—be it crop diversity, antislavery
        ideologies, economic diversification, or the increasingly staggering cost of
        purchasing and maintaining slaves—became anathema to the southern
        economic and cultural identity. Cotton had become the foundation of
        the southern economy. Indeed, it was the only major product, besides
        perhaps sugarcane in Louisiana, that the South could effectively market
        internationally. As a result, southern planters, politicians, merchants, and
        traders became more and more dedicated—some would say “obsessed”—
        to the means of its production: slaves and slavery. In 1834, Joseph Ingra-
        ham wrote that “to sell cotton in order to buy negroes—to make more
        cotton to buy more negroes, ‘ad infinitum,’ is the aim and direct tendency
        of all the operations of the thorough going cotton planter; his whole soul
        is wrapped up in the pursuit.”13 Twenty-three years later, such pursuit had
        taken a seemingly religious character, as James Stirling, an Englishman
        traveling through the South, observed, “[slaves] and cotton—cotton and
        [slaves]; these are the law and the prophets to the men of the South.”14
            The Cotton Revolution was a time of capitalism, panic, stress, and
        competition. Planters expanded their lands, purchased slaves, extended
        lines of credit, and went into massive amounts of debt because they were
        constantly working against the next guy, the newcomer, the social mover,
        the speculator, the trader. A single bad crop could cost even the most
        wealthy planter his or her entire life, along with those of his or her slaves
        and their families. Although the cotton market was large and profitable,
        it was also fickle, risky, and cost intensive. The more wealth one gained,
        the more land one needed to procure, which led to more slaves, more
        credit, and more mouths to feed. The decades before the Civil War in the
        South, then, were not times of slow, simple tradition. They were times of
        high competition, high risk, and high reward, no matter where one stood
        in the social hierarchy. But the risk was not always economic.
            The most tragic, indeed horrifying, aspect of slavery was its inhuman-
        ity. All slaves had memories, emotions, experiences, and thoughts. They
        saw their experiences in full color, felt the pain of the lash, the heat of the

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  293




In southern cities like Norfolk, Virginia, markets sold not only vegetables, fruits, meats, and sundries, but
also slaves. Enslaved men and women, like the two walking in the direct center, lived and labored next to
free people, black and white. S. Weeks, Market Square, Norfolk, from Henry Howe’s Historical Collections
of Virginia, 1845. Wikimedia.



sun, and the heartbreak of loss, whether through death, betrayal, or sale.
Communities developed on a shared sense of suffering, common work,
and even family ties. Slaves communicated in the slave markets of the
urban South and worked together to help their families, ease their loads,
or simply frustrate their owners. Simple actions of resistance, such as
breaking a hoe, running a wagon off the road, causing a delay in produc-
tion due to injury, running away, or even pregnancy provided a language
shared by nearly all slaves in the agricultural workforce, a sense of unity
that remained unsaid but was acted out daily.
    Beyond the basic and confounding horror of it all, the problem of slav-
ery in the cotton South was twofold. First and most immediate was the fear
and risk of rebellion. With nearly four million individual slaves residing in
the South in 1860, and nearly 2.5 million living in the Cotton Belt alone,
the system of communication, resistance, and potential violence among
slaves did not escape the minds of slaveholders across the region and the
nation as a whole. As early as 1785, Thomas Jefferson wrote in his Notes
on the State of Virginia that slaves should be freed, but then they should be
colonized to another country, where they could become an “independant
people.” White people’s prejudices, and black people’s “recollections . . .
of the injuries they have sustained” under slavery, would keep the two
races from successfully living together in America. If freed slaves were not

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 9 4 chapt er 11


        colonized, eventually there would be “convulsions which will probably
        never end but in the extermination of the one or the other race.”15
             Southern writers, planters, farmers, merchants, and politicians ex-
        pressed the same fears more than a half century later. “The South can-
        not recede,” declared an anonymous writer in an 1852 issue of the New
        ­Orleans–based De Bow’s Review. “She must fight for her slaves or against
         them. Even cowardice would not save her.”16 To many slaveholders in
         the South, slavery was the saving grace of not only their own economic
         stability but also the maintenance of peace and security in everyday life.
         Much of pro-slavery ideology rested on the notion that slavery provided
         a sense of order, duty, and legitimacy to the lives of individual slaves,
         feelings that Africans and African Americans, it was said, could not oth-
         erwise experience. Without slavery, many thought, “blacks” (the word
         most often used for “slaves” in regular conversation) would become vio-
         lent, aimless, and uncontrollable.
             Some commentators recognized the problem in the 1850s as the inter-
         nal slave trade, the legal trade of slaves between states, along rivers, and
         along the Atlantic coastline. The internal trade picked up in the decade
         before the Civil War. The problem was rather simple. The more slaves
         one owned, the more money it cost to maintain them and to extract
         product from their work. As planters and cotton growers expanded their
         lands and purchased more slaves, their expectations increased.
             And productivity, in large part, did increase. But it came on the backs
         of slaves with heavier workloads, longer hours, and more intense pun-
         ishments. “The great limitation to production is labor,” wrote one com-
         mentator in the American Cotton Planter in 1853. And many planters
         recognized this limitation and worked night and day, sometimes literally,
         to find the furthest extent of that limit.17 According to some contempo-
         rary accounts, by the mid-1850s, the expected production of an indi-
         vidual slave in Mississippi’s Cotton Belt had increased from between four
         and five bales (weighing about 500 pounds each) per day to between eight
         and ten bales per day, on average.18 Other, perhaps more reliable sources,
         such as the account book of Buena Vista Plantation in Tensas Parish,
         Louisiana, list average daily production at between 300 and 500 pounds
         “per hand,” with weekly averages ranging from 1,700 to 2,100 pounds
         “per hand.” Cotton production “per hand” increased by 600 percent in
         Mississippi between 1820 and 1860.19 Each slave, then, was working
        longer, harder hours to keep up with his or her master’s expected yield.
             Here was capitalism with its most colonial, violent, and exploitative
        face. Humanity became a commodity used and worked to produce profit

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  295




                                                           The slave trade sold bondspeople—men,
                                                           women, and children—like mere pieces
                                                           of property, as seen in the advertisements
                                                           produced during the era. 1840 poster
                                                           advertising slaves for sale in New Orleans.
                                                           Wikimedia.



for a select group of investors, regardless of its shortfalls, dangers, and
immoralities. But slavery, profit, and cotton did not exist only in the rural
South. The Cotton Revolution sparked the growth of an urban South,
cities that served as southern hubs of a global market, conduits through
which the work of slaves and the profits of planters met and funded a
wider world.


IV. The South and the City
Much of the story of slavery and cotton lies in the rural areas where cot-
ton actually grew. Slaves worked in the fields, and planters and farmers
held reign over their plantations and farms. But the 1830s, 1840s, and
1850s saw an extraordinary spike in urban growth across the South. For
nearly a half century after the Revolution, the South existed as a series
of plantations, county seats, and small towns, some connected by roads,
others connected only by rivers, streams, and lakes. Cities certainly ex-
isted, but they served more as local ports than as regional, or national,
commercial hubs. For example, New Orleans, then the capital of Loui-
siana, which entered the union in 1812, was home to just over 27,000
people in 1820; and even with such a seemingly small population, it was

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 9 6 chapt er 11


        the second-largest city in the South—Baltimore had more than 62,000
        people in 1820.20 Given the standard nineteenth-century measurement of
        an urban space (2,500+ people), the South had just ten in that year, one
        of which—Mobile, Alabama—contained only 2,672 individuals, nearly
        half of whom were enslaved.21
            As late as the 1820s, southern life was predicated on a rural ­lifestyle—
        farming, laboring, acquiring land and slaves, and producing whatever
        that land and those slaves could produce. The market, often located
        in the nearest town or city, rarely stretched beyond state lines. Even in
        places like New Orleans, Charleston, and Norfolk, Virginia, which had
        active ports as early as the 1790s, shipments rarely, with some notable
        exceptions, left American waters or traveled farther than the closest port
        down the coast. In the first decades of the nineteenth century, American
        involvement in international trade was largely confined to ports in New
        York, Boston, Philadelphia, and sometimes Baltimore—which loosely
        falls under the demographic category of the South. Imports dwarfed ex-
        ports. In 1807, U.S. imports outnumbered exports by nearly $100 mil-
        lion, and even as the Napoleonic Wars broke out in Europe, causing a
        drastic decrease in European production and trade, the United States still
        took in almost $50 million more than it sent out.22
            Cotton changed much of this, at least with respect to the South. Be-
        fore cotton, the South had few major ports, almost none of which actively
        maintained international trade routes or even domestic supply routes. In-
        ternal travel and supply was difficult, especially on the waters of the Mis-
        sissippi River, the main artery of the North American continent, and the
        eventual gold mine of the South. With the Mississippi’s strong current,
        deadly undertow, and constant sharp turns, sandbars, and subsystems,
        navigation was difficult and dangerous. The river promised a revolution
        in trade, transportation, and commerce only if the technology existed
        to handle its impossible bends and fight against its southbound current.
        By the 1820s and into the 1830s, small ships could successfully navi-
        gate their way to New Orleans from as far north as Memphis and even
        St. Louis, if they so dared. But the problem was getting back. Most often,
        traders and sailors scuttled their boats on landing in New Orleans, selling
        the wood for a quick profit or a journey home on a wagon or caravan.
            The rise of cotton benefited from a change in transportation technol-
        ogy that aided and guided the growth of southern cotton into one of the
        world’s leading commodities. In January 1812, a 371-ton ship called the
        New Orleans arrived at its namesake city from the distant internal port



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  297


of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. This was the first steamboat to navigate the
internal waterways of the North American continent from one end to
the other and remain capable of returning home. The technology was far
from perfect—the New Orleans sank two years later after hitting a sub-
merged sandbar covered in driftwood—but its successful trial promised a
bright, new future for river-based travel.
    And that future was, indeed, bright. Just five years after the New Or-
leans arrived in its city, 17 steamboats ran regular upriver lines. By the
mid-1840s, more than 700 steamboats did the same. In 1860, the port
of New Orleans received and unloaded 3,500 steamboats, all focused
entirely on internal trade. These boats carried around 160,000 tons of
raw product that merchants, traders, and agents converted into nearly
$220 million in trade, all in a single year.23 More than 80 percent of
the yield was from cotton alone, the product of the same fields tilled,
expanded, and sold over the preceding three decades. Only now, in the
1840s and 1850s, could those fields, plantations, and farms simply load




                                                 Gordon, pictured here, endured terrible brutality
                                                 from his master before escaping to Union Army
                                                 lines in 1863. He would become a soldier and help
                                                 fight to end the violent system that produced the
                                                 horrendous scars on his back. Matthew Brady,
                                                 Gordon, 1863. Wikimedia.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
2 9 8 chapt er 11


        their ­products onto a boat and wait for the profit, credit, or supplies to
        return from downriver.
            The explosion of steam power changed the face of the South, and
        indeed the nation as a whole. Everything that could be steam-powered
        was steam-powered, sometimes with mixed results. Cotton gins, wagons,
        grinders, looms, and baths, among countless others, all fell under the net
        of this new technology. Most importantly, the South’s rivers, lakes, and
        bays were no longer barriers and hindrances to commerce. Quite the op-
        posite; they had become the means by which commerce flowed, the roads
        of a modernizing society and region. And most importantly, the ability
        to use internal waterways connected the rural interior to increasingly
        urban ports, the sources of raw materials—cotton, tobacco, wheat, and
        so on—to an eager global market.
            Coastal ports like New Orleans, Charleston, Norfolk, and even Rich-
        mond became targets of steamboats and coastal carriers. Merchants,
        traders, skilled laborers, and foreign speculators and agents flooded the
        towns. In fact, the South experienced a a greater rate of urbanization
        between 1820 and 1860 than the seemingly more industrial, urban-based
        North. Urbanization of the South simply looked different from that seen
        in the North and in Europe. Where most northern and some European
        cities (most notably London, Liverpool, Manchester, and Paris) devel-
        oped along the lines of industry, creating public spaces to boost the
        morale of wage laborers in factories, on the docks, and in storehouses,
        southern cities developed within the cyclical logic of sustaining the trade
        in cotton that justified and paid for the maintenance of an enslaved labor
        force. The growth of southern cities, then, allowed slavery to flourish and
        brought the South into a more modern world.
            Between 1820 and 1860, quite a few southern towns experienced dra-
        matic population growth, which paralleled the increase in cotton produc-
        tion and international trade to and from the South. The 27,176 people
        New Orleans claimed in 1820 expanded to more than 168,000 by 1860.
        In fact, in New Orleans, the population nearly quadrupled from 1830 to
        1840 as the Cotton Revolution hit full stride. At the same time, Charles-
        ton’s population nearly doubled, from 24,780 to 40,522; Richmond ex-
        panded threefold, growing from a town of 12,067 to a capital city of
        37,910; and St. Louis experienced the largest increase of any city in the
        nation, expanding from a frontier town of 10,049 to a booming Missis-
        sippi River metropolis of 160,773.24
            The city and the field, the urban center and the rural space, were inex-
        tricably linked in the decades before the Civil War. And that relationship

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  299


connected the region to a global market and community. As southern cit-
ies grew, they became more cosmopolitan, attracting types of people ei-
ther unsuited for or uninterested in rural life. These people—merchants,
skilled laborers, traders, sellers of all kinds and colors—brought rural
goods to a market desperate for raw materials. Everyone, it seemed, had
a place in the cotton trade. Agents, many of them transients from the
North, and in some cases Europe, represented the interests of planters
and cotton farmers in the cities, making connections with traders who
in turn made deals with manufactories in the Northeast, Liverpool, and
Paris.
    Among the more important aspects of southern urbanization was the
development of a middle class in the urban centers, something that never
fully developed in the more rural areas. In a very general sense, the rural
South fell under a two-class system in which a landowning elite con-
trolled the politics and most of the capital, and a working poor survived
on subsistence farming or basic, unskilled labor funded by the elite. The
development of large urban centers founded on trade, and flush with
transient populations of sailors, merchants, and travelers, gave rise to a
large, highly developed middle class in the South. Predicated on the idea
of separation from those above and below them, middle-class men and
women in the South thrived in the active, feverish rush of port city life.
    Skilled craftsmen, merchants, traders, speculators, and store owners
made up the southern middle class. Fashion trends no longer required an
honest function—such as a broad-brimmed hat to protect one from the
sun, knee-high boots for horse riding, and linen shirts and trousers to
fight the heat of an unrelenting sun. Silk, cotton, and bright colors came
into vogue, especially in coastal cities like New Orleans and Charleston;
cravats, golden brooches, diamonds, and “the best stylings of Europe”
became the standards of urban middle-class life in the South.25 Neigh-
bors, friends, and business partners formed and joined the same benevo-
lent societies. These societies worked to aid the less fortunate in society,
the orphans, the impoverished, the destitute. But in many cases these
benevolent societies simply served as a way to keep other people out of
middle-class circles, sustaining both wealth and social prestige within an
insular, well-regulated community. Members and partners married each
other’s sisters, stood as godparents for each other’s children, and served,
when the time came, as executors of fellow members’ wills.
    The city bred exclusivity. That was part of the rush, part of the fever
of the time. Built on the cotton trade, funded by European and northeast-
ern merchants, markets, and manufactories, southern cities became the

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 0 0 chapt er 11


        headquarters of the nation’s largest and most profitable commodities—
        cotton and slaves. And they welcomed the world with open checkbooks
        and open arms.


        V. Southern Cultures
        To understand the global and economic functions of the South, we also
        must understand the people who made the whole thing work. The South,
        more than perhaps any other region in the United States, had a great di-
        versity of cultures and situations. The South still relied on the existence of
        slavery; as a result, it was home to nearly four million enslaved people by
        1860, amounting to nearly one third of the entire southern population.26
        Naturally, these people, though legally unfree, developed a culture all
        their own. They created kinship and family networks, systems of (often
        illicit) trade, linguistic codes, religious congregations, and even benevo-
        lent and social aid organizations—all within the grip of slavery, a system
        dedicated to extraction rather than development, work and production
        rather than community and emotion.
             The concept of family, more than anything else, played a crucial role
        in the daily lives of slaves. Family and kinship networks, and the ben-
        efits they carried, represented an institution through which slaves could
        piece together a sense of community, a sense of feeling and dedication,
        separate from the forced system of production that defined their daily
        lives. The creation of family units, distant relations, and communal tradi-
        tions allowed slaves to maintain religious beliefs, ancient ancestral tra-
        ditions, and even names passed down from generation to generation in
        a way that challenged enslavement. Ideas passed between relatives on
        different plantations, names given to children in honor of the deceased,
        and basic forms of love and devotion created a sense of individuality,
        an identity that assuaged the loneliness and desperation of enslaved life.
        Family defined how each plantation, each community, functioned, grew,
        and labored.
             Nothing under slavery lasted long, at least not in the same form.
        Slave families and networks were no exceptions to this rule. African-born
        slaves during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries engaged in mar-
        riages—sometimes polygamous—with those of the same ethnic groups
        whenever possible. This, most importantly, allowed for the maintenance
        of cultural traditions, such as language, religion, name practices, and
        even the rare practice of bodily scarring. In some parts of the South, such



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  301


as Louisiana and coastal South Carolina, ethnic homogeneity thrived,
and as a result, traditions and networks survived relatively unchanged for
decades. As the number of slaves arriving in the United States increased,
and generations of American-born slaves overtook the original African-
born populations, the practice of marriage, especially among members of
the same ethnic group or even simply the same plantation, became vital
to the continuation of aging traditions. Marriage was the most important
aspect of cultural and identity formation, as it connected slaves to their
own pasts and gave some sense of protection for the future.27 By the start
of the Civil War, approximately two thirds of slaves were members of
nuclear households, each household averaging six people—mother, fa-
ther, children, and often a grandparent, elderly aunt or uncle, and even
“in-laws.” Those who did not have a marriage bond, or even a nuclear
family, still maintained family ties, most often living with a single parent,
brother, sister, or grandparent.28
    Many slave marriages endured for many years. But the threat of dis-
ruption, often through sale, always loomed. As the internal slave trade
increased following the constitutional ban on slave importation in 1808
and the rise of cotton in the 1830s and 1840s, slave families, especially




                                                           Free people of color were present
                                                           throughout the American South, particu-
                                                           larly in urban areas like Charleston and
                                                           New Orleans. Some were relatively well
                                                           off, like this femme de couleur libre who
                                                           posed with her mixed-race child in front
                                                           of her New Orleans home, maintaining
                                                           a middling position between free whites
                                                           and unfree blacks. Free woman of color
                                                           with quadroon daughter; late eighteenth-
                                                           century collage painting, New Orleans.
                                                           Wikimedia.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 0 2 chapt er 11


        those established prior to the slaves’ arrival in the United States, came
        under increased threat. Hundreds of thousands of marriages, many
        with children, fell victim to sale “downriver”—a euphemism for the
        near-­constant flow of slave laborers down the Mississippi River to the
        developing Cotton Belt in the Southwest.29 In fact, during the Cotton
        Revolution alone, between one fifth and one third of all slave marriages
        were broken up through sale or forced migration. But this was not the
        only threat. Planters and slave owners recognized that marriage was, in
        the most basic and tragic sense, a privilege granted and defined by them
        for their slaves. And as a result, many slaveholders used slaves’ mar-
        riages, or the threats thereto, to squeeze out more production, counteract
        disobedience, or simply make a gesture of power and superiority.
            Threats to family networks, marriages, and household stability did
        not stop with the death of a master. A slave couple could live their entire
        lives together, even having been born, raised, and married on the slave
        plantation, and, following the death of their master, find themselves at
        opposite sides of the known world. It only took a single relative, execu-
        tor, creditor, or friend of the deceased to make a claim against the estate
        to cause the sale and dispersal of an entire slave community.
            Enslaved women were particularly vulnerable to the shifts of fate
        attached to slavery. In many cases, female slaves did the same work as
        men, spending the day—from sunup to sundown—in the fields picking
        and bundling cotton. In some rare cases, especially among the larger
        plantations, planters tended to use women as house servants more than
        men, but this was not universal. In both cases, however, female slaves’
        experiences were different from those of their male counterparts, hus-
        bands, and neighbors. Sexual violence, unwanted pregnancies, and con-
        stant child-rearing while continuing to work the fields all made life as
        a female slave more prone to disruption and uncertainty. Harriet Ja-
        cobs, an enslaved woman from North Carolina, chronicled her master’s
        attempts to sexually abuse her in her narrative, Incidents in the Life
        of a Slave Girl. Jacobs suggested that her successful attempts to resist
        sexual assault and her determination to love whom she pleased was
        “something akin to freedom.”30 But this “freedom,” however empow-
        ering and contextual, did not cast a wide net. Many enslaved women
        had no choice concerning love, sex, and motherhood. On plantations
        and small farms, and even in cities, rape was ever-present. Like the
        splitting of families, slave owners used sexual violence as a form of ter-
        rorism, a way to promote increased production, obedience, and power



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  303


relations. And this was not restricted to unmarried women. In numer-
ous contemporary accounts, particularly violent slave owners forced
men to witness the rape of their wives, daughters, and relatives, often
as punishment, but occasionally as a sadistic expression of power and
dominance.31
    As property, enslaved women had no recourse, and society, by and
large, did not see a crime in this type of violence. Racist pseudoscien-
tists claimed that whites could not physically rape Africans or African
Americans, as the sexual organs of each were not compatible in that
way. State law, in some cases, supported this view, claiming that rape
could only occur between either two white people or a black man and a
white woman. All other cases fell under a silent acceptance.32 The conse-
quences of rape, too, fell to the victim in the case of slaves. Pregnancies
that resulted from rape did not always lead to a lighter workload for
the mother. And if a slave acted out against a rapist, whether that be her
master, her mistress, or any other white attacker, her actions were seen
as crimes rather than desperate acts of survival. For example, a nineteen-
year-old slave named Celia fell victim to repeated rape by her master in
                                                                               The women in this
Callaway County, Missouri. Between 1850 and 1855, Robert Newsom                photograph are
raped Celia hundreds of times, producing two children and several mis-         Selina Gray and
                                                                               two of her daugh-
carriages. Sick and desperate in the fall of 1855, Celia took a club and       ters. Gray was the
struck her master in the head, killing him. But instead of sympathy and        enslaved house-
                                                                               keeper to Robert
aid, or even an honest attempt to understand and empathize, the com-           E. Lee. National
munity called for the execution of Celia. On November 16, 1855, after a        Park Service.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 0 4 chapt er 11


                      trial of ten days, Celia, the nineteen-year-old rape victim and slave, was
                      hanged for her crimes against her master.33
                          Gender inequality did not always fall along the same lines as racial
                      inequality. Southern society, especially in the age of cotton, deferred
                      to white men, under whom laws, social norms, and cultural practices
                      were written, dictated, and maintained. White women and free women
                      of color lived in a society dominated, in nearly every aspect, by men.
                      Denied voting rights, women of all statuses and colors had no direct
                      representation in the creation and discussion of law. Husbands, it was
                      said, represented their wives, as the public sphere was too violent, heated,
                      and high-minded for women. Society expected women to represent the
                      foundations of the republic, gaining respectability through their work at
                      home, in support of their husbands and children, away from the rough
                      and boisterous realm of masculinity. In many cases, too, law did not




The issue of emigration elicited disparate reactions from African Americans. Tens of thousands left the
United States for Liberia, a map of which is shown here, to pursue greater freedoms and prosperity. Most
emigrants did not experience such success, but Liberia continued to attract black settlers for decades. J.
Ashmun, Map of the West Coast of Africa from Sierra Leone to Cape Palmas, including the colony of Libe-
ria, . . . 1830. Library of Congress.



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  305


protect women the same way it protected men. In most states, marriage,
an act expected of any self-respecting, reasonable woman of any class,
effectively transferred all of a woman’s property to her husband, forever,
regardless of claim or command. Divorce existed, but it hardly worked
in a woman’s favor, and often, if successful, it ruined the wife’s standing
in society and even led to well-known cases of suicide.34
    Life on the ground in the cotton South, like the cities, systems, and
networks on which it rested, defied the standard narrative of the Old
South. Slavery existed to dominate, yet slaves formed bonds, maintained
traditions, and crafted new culture. They fell in love, had children, and
protected one another using the privileges granted them by their captors
and the basic intellect allowed all human beings. They were resourceful,
brilliant, and vibrant, and they created freedom where freedom seem-
ingly could not exist. And within those communities, resilience and dedi-
cation often led to cultural sustenance. Among the enslaved, women, and
the impoverished-but-free, culture thrived in ways that are difficult to
see through the bales of cotton and the stacks of money sitting on the
docks and in the countinghouses of the South’s urban centers. But re-
ligion, honor, and pride transcended material goods, especially among
those who could not express themselves that way.


VI. Religion and Honor in the Slave South
Economic growth, violence, and exploitation coexisted and mutually re-
inforced evangelical Christianity in the South. The revivals of the Second
Great Awakening established the region’s prevailing religious culture.
Led by Methodists, Baptists, and to a lesser degree, Presbyterians, this
intense period of religious regeneration swept along the southern back-
country. By the outbreak of the Civil War, most southerners who were
affiliated with a religious denomination belonged to either the Baptist
or Methodist faith.35 Both churches in the South briefly attacked slavery
before transforming into some of the most vocal defenders of slavery and
the southern social order.
     Southern ministers contended that God himself had selected Africans
for bondage but also considered the evangelization of slaves to be one of
their greatest callings.36 Missionary efforts among southern slaves largely
succeeded and Protestantism spread rapidly among African Americans,
leading to a proliferation of biracial congregations and prominent inde-
pendent black churches. Some black and white ­southerners forged ­positive



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 0 6 chapt er 11


        and rewarding biracial connections; however, more often black and white
        southerners described strained or superficial religious relationships.
            As the institution of slavery hardened racism in the South, relation-
        ships between missionaries and Native Americans transformed as well.
        Missionaries of all denominations were among the first to represent
        themselves as “pillars of white authority.” After the Louisiana Purchase
        in 1803, plantation culture expanded into the Deep South, and mission
        work became a crucial element of Christian expansion. Frontier mission
        schools carried a continual flow of Christian influence into Native Ameri-
        can communities. Some missionaries learned indigenous languages, but
        many more worked to prevent indigenous children from speaking their
        native tongues, insisting on English for Christian understanding. By the
        Indian removals of 1835 and the Trail of Tears in 1838, missionaries in
        the South preached a pro-slavery theology that emphasized obedience to
        masters, the biblical basis of racial slavery via the curse of Ham, and the
        “civilizing” paternalism of slave owners.
            Slaves most commonly received Christian instruction from white
        preachers or masters, whose religious message typically stressed slave sub-
        servience. Anti-literacy laws ensured that most slaves would be unable to
        read the Bible in its entirety and thus could not acquaint themselves with
        such inspirational stories as Moses delivering the Israelites out of slavery.
        Contradictions between God’s Word and master and mistress cruelty did
        not pass unnoticed by many enslaved African Americans. As former slave
        William Wells Brown declared, “slaveholders hide themselves behind the
        Church,” adding that “a more praying, preaching, psalm-singing people
        cannot be found than the slaveholders of the South.”37
            Many slaves chose to create and practice their own versions of Chris-
        tianity, one that typically incorporated aspects of traditional African re-
        ligions with limited input from the white community. Nat Turner, the
        leader of the great slave rebellion, found inspiration from religion early
        in life. Adopting an austere Christian lifestyle during his adolescence,
        Turner claimed to have been visited by “spirits” during his twenties and
        considered himself something of a prophet. He claimed to have had vi-
        sions, in which he was called on to do the work of God, leading some
        contemporaries (as well as historians) to question his sanity.38
            Inspired by his faith, Turner led the most deadly slave rebellion in the
        antebellum South. On the morning of August 22, 1831, in Southampton
        County, Virginia, Nat Turner and six collaborators attempted to free the re-
        gion’s enslaved population. Turner initiated the violence by killing his mas-
        ter with an ax blow to the head. By the end of the day, Turner and his band,

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  307




This woodcut captured the terror felt by white southerners in the aftermath of Nat Turner’s rebellion.
After the rebellion, fearful white reactionaries killed hundreds of enslaved people—most of whom were
unconnected to the rebellion—and the state created stricter, more limiting laws concerning slavery. African
American Intellectual History Society.



which had grown to over fifty men, killed fifty-seven white men, women,
and children on eleven farms. By the next day, the local militia and white
residents had captured or killed all of the participants except Turner, who
hid for a number of weeks in nearby woods before being captured and ex-
ecuted. The white terror that followed Nat Turner’s rebellion transformed
southern religion, as anti-literacy laws increased and black-led churches
were broken up and placed under the supervision of white ministers.
    Evangelical religion also shaped understandings of what it meant to
be a southern man or a southern woman. Southern manhood was largely
shaped by an obsession with masculine honor, whereas southern woman-
hood centered on expectations of sexual virtue or purity. Honor priori-
tized the public recognition of white masculine claims to reputation and
authority. Southern men developed a code to ritualize their interactions
with each other and to perform their expectations of honor. This code
structured language and behavior and was designed to minimize conflict.
But when conflict did arise, the code also provided rituals that would
reduce the resulting violence.
    The formal duel exemplified the code in action. If two men could
not settle a dispute through the arbitration of their friends, they would

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 0 8 chapt er 11


        e­ xchange pistol shots to prove their equal honor status. Duelists arranged
         a secluded meeting, chose from a set of deadly weapons, and risked their
         lives as they clashed with swords or fired pistols at one another. Some
         of the most illustrious men in American history participated in a duel
         at some point during their lives, including President Andrew Jackson,
         Vice President Aaron Burr, and U.S. senators Henry Clay and Thomas
         Hart Benton. In all but Burr’s case, dueling helped elevate these men to
         prominence.
             Violence among the lower classes, especially those in the backcoun-
         try, involved fistfights and shoot-outs. Tactics included the sharpening
         of fingernails and filing of teeth into razor-sharp points, which would
         be used to gouge eyes and bite off ears and noses. In a duel, a gentleman
         achieved recognition by risking his life rather than killing his opponent,
         whereas those involved in rough-and-tumble fighting achieved victory
         through maiming their opponent.
             The legal system was partially to blame for the prevalence of violence
         in the Old South. Although states and territories had laws against murder,
         rape, and various other forms of violence, including specific laws against
         dueling, upper-class southerners were rarely prosecuted, and juries often
         acquitted the accused. Despite the fact that hundreds of duelists fought
         and killed one another, there is little evidence that many duelists faced
         prosecution, and only one, Timothy Bennett (of Belleville, Illinois), was
         ever executed. By contrast, prosecutors routinely sought cases against
         lower-class southerners, who were found guilty in greater numbers than
         their wealthier counterparts.
             The southern emphasis on honor affected women as well. While
         southern men worked to maintain their sense of masculinity; so too
         southern women cultivated a sense of femininity. Femininity in the South
         was intimately tied to the domestic sphere, even more so than for women
         in the North. The cult of domesticity strictly limited the ability of wealthy
         southern women to engage in public life. While northern women began
         to organize reform societies, southern women remained bound to the
         home, where they were instructed to cultivate their families’ religious
         sensibility and manage their household. Managing the household was
         not easy work, however. For women on large plantations, managing the
         household would include directing a large bureaucracy of potentially
         rebellious slaves. For most southern women who did not live on plan-
         tations, managing the household included nearly constant work in keep-
         ing families clean, fed, and well-behaved. On top of these duties, many
         southern women were required to help with agricultural tasks.

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  309


    Female labor was an important aspect of the southern economy, but
the social position of women in southern culture was understood not
through economic labor but rather through moral virtue. While men
fought to get ahead in the turbulent world of the cotton boom, women
were instructed to offer a calming, moralizing influence on husbands and
children. The home was to be a place of quiet respite and spiritual sol-
ace. Under the guidance of a virtuous woman, the southern home would
foster the values required for economic success and cultural refinement.
Female virtue came to be understood largely as a euphemism for sexual
purity, and southern culture, southern law, and southern violence largely
centered on protecting that virtue of sexual purity from any possible
imagined threat. In a world saturated with the sexual exploitation of
black women, southerners developed a paranoid obsession with pro-
tecting the sexual purity of white women. Black men were presented as
an insatiable sexual threat. Racial systems of violence and domination
were wielded with crushing intensity for generations, all in the name of
keeping white womanhood as pure as the cotton that anchored southern
society.


VII. Conclusion
Cotton created the antebellum South. The wildly profitable commodity
opened a previously closed society to the grandeur, the profit, the ex-
ploitation, and the social dimensions of a larger, more connected, global
community. In this way, the South, and the world, benefited from the
Cotton Revolution and the urban growth it sparked. But not all that
glitters is gold. Slavery remained and the internal slave trade grew to
untold heights as the 1860s approached. Politics, race relations, and the
burden of slavery continued beneath the roar of steamboats, counting-
houses, and the exchange of goods. Underneath it all, many questions re-
mained—chief among them, what to do if slavery somehow came under
threat.


VIII. Reference Material
This chapter was edited by Andrew Wegmann, with content contributions by
Ian Beamish, Amanda Bellows, Marjorie Brown, Matthew Byron, Steffi Cerato,
Kristin Condotta, Mari Crabtree, Jeff Fortney, Robert Gudmestad, John Marks,
Maria Montalvo, James Anthony Owen, Katherine Rohrer, Marie Stango, James
Wellborn, Ben Wright, and Ashley Young.


         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 1 0 chapt er 11


            Recommended citation: Ian Beamish et al., “The Cotton Revolution,” An-
        drew Wegmann, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright
        (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

        N o t e s t o C h a p t e r 11
             1. See Sven Beckert, Empire of Cotton: A Global History (New York: Knopf,
        2014), 103; and Angela Lakwete, Inventing the Cotton Gin: Machine and Myth
        in Antebellum America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003),
        148–151.
             2. Walter Johnson, River of Dark Dreams: Slavery and Empire in the Cotton
        Kingdom (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2013), 151–152; John Solomon Otto,
        The Southern Frontiers, 1607–1860: The Agricultural Evolution of the Colonial
        and Antebellum South (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1989), 94–96.
             3. Joshua D. Rothman, Flush Times and Fever Dreams: A Story of Capi-
        talism and Slavery in the Age of Jackson (Athens: University of Georgia Press,
        2012), 6–7; David J. Libby, Slavery and Frontier Mississippi, 1720–1835 (Jack-
        son: University Press of Mississippi, 2004), 30–36; Scott Reynolds Nelson, A
        Nation of Deadbeats: An Uncommon History of America’s Financial Disasters
        (New York: Knopf, 2012), 115–118.
             4. Joseph Holt Ingraham, quoted in Rothman, Flush Times and Fever
        Dreams, 5.
             5. W. H. Sparks, Memories of Fifty Years (Philadelphia: Claxton, Remsen
        and Haffelfinger, 1870), 364.
             6. Beckert, Empire of Cotton, 102–103.
             7. For more cotton statistics, see Rothman, Flush Times and Fever Dreams,
        3–5, 96–103; Johnson, River of Dark Dreams, 254–260; Beckert, Empire of Cot-
        ton, 102–104; Avery Plaw, “Slavery,” in Cynthia Clark, ed., The American Econ-
        omy: A Historical Encyclopedia (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio, 2011), 108–109,
        787–798; William J. Phalen, The Consequences of Cotton in Antebellum Amer-
        ica (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2014), 110–114; and Gene Dattel, Cotton and
        Race in the Making of America: The Human Costs of Economic Power (Lanham,
        MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2009), 370–371.
             8. For a valuable and approachable rundown of American slavery statistics,
        see Jenny Bourne, “Slavery in the United States,” https://​eh​.net/​encyclopedia/​
        slavery​-in​-the​-united​-states/, accessed May 7, 2018. For statistics earlier than
        1790, see Edmund S. Morgan, American Slavery, American Freedom: The Or-
        deal of Colonial Virginia (New York: Norton, 1975), appendix; and Peter Kol-
        chin, American Slavery: 1619–1877 (New York: Hill and Wang, 1993), 252–257.
        All slavery statistics hereafter refer to Bourne’s “Slavery in the United States”
        unless otherwise noted.
             9. On antebellum land prices, especially in the Cotton Belt, see Phalen,
        Consequences of Cotton, 157–160; Otto, The Southern Frontiers, 86–99; Beth
        English, A Common Thread: Labor, Politics, and Capital Mobility in the Tex-
        tile Industry (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2006), 40–44; and Harold D.
        Woodman, King Cotton and His Retainers: Financing and Marketing the Cotton



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  311


Crop of the South, 1800–1925 (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press,
1990), chap. 11.
    10. See Brenda E. Stevenson, Life in Black and White: Family and Com-
munity in the Slave South (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), 171–181.
    11. See Walter Johnson, Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave
Market (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 140–141; and John
Brown, Slave Life in Georgia: A Narrative of the Life, Sufferings, and Escapes of
John Brown, a Fugitive Now in England (London: Chamerovzow, 1855), 16–17.
    12. James L. Huston, “The Pregnant Economies of the Border South, 1840-
1860: Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, and the Possibilities of Slave-Labor Expan-
sion,” in L. Diane Barnes, Brian Schoen, and Frank Towers, eds., The Old South’s
Modern Worlds: Slavery, Region, and Nation in the Age of Progress (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2011), 132-134.
    13. See Joseph Holt Ingraham, The Southwest, by a Yankee (New York:
Harper, 1835), Vol. 2, 91, quoted in Woodman, King Cotton and His Retainers,
135. A similar quote, recorded in 1854 and attributed to Edward Russell, ap-
pears in Johnson, River of Dark Dreams, 12.
    14. James Stirling, Letters from the Slaves States (London: Parker, 1857),
179–180.
    15. Thomas Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia, ed. Frank Shuffelton
(New York: Penguin, 1999), 145.
    16. See “Excessive Slave Population: The Remedy,” De Bow’s Review
12, no. 2 (February 1852): 184–185, also quoted in Johnson, River of Dark
Dreams, 13.
    17. See Anonymous, “Cotton and Its Prospects,” American Cotton Planter
1, no. 8 (August 1853): 226, also quoted in Johnson, River of Dark Dreams, 246.
    18. See Thomas Prentice Kettel, Southern Wealth and Northern Profits, as
Exhibited in Statistical Facts and Official Figures (New York: Wood, 1860), 23.
    19. Johnson, River of Dark Dreams, 247, 244.
    20. On the populations of southern cities, see Richard C. Wade, Slavery in
the Cities: The South, 1820–1860 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1964),
325–327. The top three southern cities, in terms of population in 1820, were
Baltimore (62,738), New Orleans (27,176), and Charleston (24,780).
    21. See Wade, Slavery in the Cities, 326.
    22. For American import-export statistics, see Spencer C. Tucker, ed., The
Encyclopedia of the Wars of the Early American Republic, 1783–1812 (Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC–Clio, 2014), 670-671; and, among others, J. Bradford De
Long, “Trade Policy and America’s Standard of Living: A Historical Perspective,”
in Susan M. Collins, ed., Exports, Imports, and the American Worker (Washing-
ton, DC: Brookings Institution, 1998), 354–357.
    23. See Johnson, River of Dark Dreams, 6, 73–88; Paul F. Paskoff, Troubled
Waters: Steamboat Disasters, River Improvements, and American Public Policy,
1821–1860 (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2007), 13–19; and Robert H. Gudmes-
tad, Steamboats and the Rise of the Cotton Kingdom (Baton Rouge: LSU Press,
2011), chap. 1, 174–180.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 1 2 chapt er 11


             24. See Scott P. Marler, The Merchants’ Capital: New Orleans and the Politi-
        cal Economy of the Nineteenth-Century South (New York: Cambridge University
        Press, 2013), part I; and Wade, Slavery in the Cities, 326–327.
             25. On the fashion of the southern middle class, see Andrew N. Wegmann,
        “Skin Color and Social Practice: The Problem of Race and Class Among New
        Orleans Creoles and Across the South, 1718–1862,” PhD diss., Louisiana State
        University, 2015, chap. 4; Jonathan D. Wells, The Origins of the Southern Mid-
        dle Class, 1800–1861 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004),
        74–80; and John G. Deal, “Middle-Class Benevolent Societies in Antebellum
        Norfolk, Virginia,” in Jonathan Daniel Wells and Jennifer R. Green, eds., The
        Southern Middle Class in the Long Nineteenth Century (Baton Rouge: LSU Press,
        2011), 92–95.
             26. The enslaved population of the South in 1860 was 3,950,511; the free,
        8,289,782. For statistics on slavery, see Bourne, “Slavery in the United States.”
             27. See Stevenson, Life in Black and White, chap. 8, especially 231–238;
        and Emily West, Chains of Love: Slave Couples in Antebellum South Carolina
        (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2004), particularly 21–33.
             28. See Stephen Crawford, “The Slave Family: A View from the Slave Nar-
        ratives,” in Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff, eds., Strategic Factors in Nine-
        teenth Century American Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W.
        Fogel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 331–350.
             29. For a fascinating, visual treatment of “downriver” slave sales, see Mau-
        rie D. McInnis, Slaves Waiting for Sale: Abolitionist Art and the American Slave
        Trade (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011), chap. 3. More generally,
        see Johnson, River of Dark Dreams, 144–147; and Kolchin, American Slavery,
        95–98.
             30. Harriet Jacobs, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl (Boston: n.p., 1861), 85.
             31. Kevin Bales and Jody Sarich, “The Paradox of Women, Children, and
        Slavery,” in Benjamin N. Lawrence and Richard L. Roberts, eds., Trafficking in
        Slavery’s Wake: Law and the Experience of Women and Children in Africa (Ath-
        ens: Ohio University Press, 2012), 241–243; Diane Miller Sommerville, Rape and
        Race in the Nineteenth-Century South (Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
        lina Press, 2004), 44–48; and Jacqueline Jones, Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow:
        Black Women, Work, and the Family, from Slavery to the Present (New York:
        Basic Books, 2010), 35–38.
             32. See Clarence Walker, Mongrel Nation: The America Begotten by Thomas
        Jefferson and Sally Hemings (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2009),
        30–46; and, among others, Hannah Rosen, Terror in the Heart of Freedom:
        Citizenship, Sexual Violence, and the Meaning of Race in the Postemancipation
        South (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009), 9–11, 75–82.
             33. See Melton A. McLaurin, Celia, a Slave: A True Story of Violence and
        Retribution in Antebellum Missouri (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1991),
        chaps. 2, 5, and 6.
             34. On divorce, see Carol Lasser and Stacey Robertson, Antebellum Women:
        Private, Public, Partisan (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2010), 5–8;
        Nancy Isenberg, Sex and Citizenship in Antebellum America (Chapel Hill: Uni-

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C o tt o n R e v o l u ti o n  313


versity of North Carolina Press, 1998), 200–204; and David Silkenat, Moments
of Despair: Suicide, Divorce, and Debt in Civil War Era North Carolina (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2011), chap. 4, particularly 77–88.
    35. Samuel S. Hill, Southern Churches in Crisis Revisited (Tuscaloosa: Uni-
versity of Alabama Press, 1999), 33.
    36. Charles Irons, The Origins of Proslavery Christianity: White and Black
Evangelicals in Colonial and Antebellum Virginia (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 2008).
    37. William Wells Brown, Narrative of William W. Brown, a Fugitive Slave.
Written by Himself (Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 1969), 56.
    38. Nat Turner, The Confessions of Nat Turner, the Leader of the Late Insur-
rection in Southampton, Va. (Baltimore: Gray, 1831), 9–11.

R e c omm e n d e d R e a d i n g
Baptist, Edward E. The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of
    American Capitalism. New York: Basic Books, 2014.
Beckert, Sven. Empire of Cotton: A Global History. New York: Knopf, 2014.
Blassingame, John W. The Slave Community: Plantation Life in the Antebellum
    South. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Camp, Stephanie M. H. Closer to Freedom: Enslaved Women and Everyday Re-
    sistance in the Plantation South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2004.
Dunaway, Wilma A. The African-American Family in Slavery and Emancipation.
    Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Einhorn, Robin. American Taxation, American Slavery. Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2006.
English, Beth. A Common Thread: Labor, Politics, and Capital Mobility in the
    Textile Industry. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2006.
Ford, Lacy K. Deliver Us from Evil: The Slavery Question in the Old South. New
    York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Genovese, Eugene D. Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made. New York:
    Vintage Books, 1974.
Hahn, Barbara. Making Tobacco Bright: Creating an American Commodity,
    1617–1937. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011.
Hall, Gwendolyn Midlo. Slavery and African Ethnicities in the Americas: Restor-
    ing the Links. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Johnson, Walter. River of Dark Dreams: Slavery and Empire in the Cotton King-
    dom. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2013.
Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and
    the Family, from Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic Books, 2010.
Kolchin, Peter. American Slavery: 1619–1877. New York: Hill and Wang, 1993.
Lakwete, Angela. Inventing the Cotton Gin: Machine and Myth in Antebellum
    America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003.
Marler, Scott P. The Merchants’ Capital: New Orleans and the Political Economy
    of the Nineteenth-Century South. New York: Cambridge University Press,
    2013.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 1 4 chapt er 11


        McDonald, Robin, and Valerie Pope Burnes. Visions of the Black Belt: A Cul-
            tural Survey of the Heart of Alabama. Tuscaloosa: The University of Ala-
            bama Press, 2015.
        McInnis, Maurie D. Slaves Waiting for Sale: Abolitionist Art and the American
            Slave Trade. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
        Penningroth, Dylan C. The Claims of Kinfolk: African American Property and
            Community in the Nineteenth-Century South. Chapel Hill: University of
            North Carolina Press, 2003.
        Rothman, Joshua D. Flush Times and Fever Dreams: A Story of Capitalism and
            Slavery in the Age of Jackson. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2012.
        Sommerville, Diane Miller. Rape and Race in the Nineteenth-Century South.
            Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004.
        Tise, Larry E. Proslavery: A History of the Defense of Slavery in America, 1701–
            1840. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1987.
        Tyler-McGraw, Marie. At the Falls: Richmond, Virginia, and Its People. Chapel
            Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1994.
        West, Emily. Chains of Love: Slave Couples in Antebellum South Carolina. Ur-
            bana: University of Illinois Press, 2004.
        White, Deborah Gray. Ar’n’t I a Woman?: Female Slaves in the Plantation South.
            Norton, 1999.
        Wood, Betty. The Origins of American Slavery: Freedom and Bondage in the
            English Colonies. New York: Hill and Wang, 1997.




  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
12
Manifest Destiny

I. Introduction
John Louis O’Sullivan, a popular editor and columnist, articulated the         Emanuel Gottlieb
                                                                               Leutze, Westward
long-standing American belief in the God-given mission of the United           the Course of
States to lead the world in the peaceful transition to democracy. In a         Empire Takes
little-read essay printed in The United States Magazine and Democratic         Its Way, 1862.
                                                                               Mural, United
Review, O’Sullivan outlined the importance of annexing Texas to the            States Capitol.
United States:

   Why, were other reasoning wanting, in favor of now elevating this ques-
   tion of the reception of Texas into the Union, out of the lower region
   of our past party dissensions, up to its proper level of a high and broad
   nationality, it surely is to be found, found abundantly, in the manner
   in which other nations have undertaken to intrude themselves into it,
   between us and the proper parties to the case, in a spirit of hostile in-
   terference against us, for the avowed object of thwarting our policy and


         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
316                                                                               chapter 12


                         hampering our power, limiting our greatness and checking the fulfillment
                         of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by Provi-
                         dence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.1

                          O’Sullivan and many others viewed expansion as necessary to achieve
                      America’s destiny and to protect American interests. The quasi-religious
                      call to spread democracy coupled with the reality of thousands of settlers
                      pressing westward. Manifest destiny was grounded in the belief that a
                      democratic, agrarian republic would save the world.
                          Although called into name in 1845, manifest destiny was a widely
                      held but vaguely defined belief that dated back to the founding of the
                      nation. First, many Americans believed that the strength of American
                      values and institutions justified moral claims to hemispheric leadership.
                      Second, the lands on the North American continent west of the Missis-
                      sippi River (and later into the Caribbean) were destined for American-led
                      political and agricultural improvement. Third, God and the Constitution
                      ordained an irrepressible destiny to accomplish redemption and democ-
                      ratization throughout the world. All three of these claims pushed many
                      Americans, whether they uttered the words manifest destiny or not, to
                      actively seek the expansion of democracy. These beliefs and the resulting




John O’Sullivan, shown here in an 1874
Harper’s Weekly sketch, coined the phrase
manifest destiny in an 1845 newspaper
article. Wikimedia.




               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  317


actions were often disastrous to anyone in the way of American expan-
sion. The new religion of American democracy spread on the feet and in
the wagons of those who moved west, imbued with the hope that their
success would be the nation’s success.
    The Young America movement, strongest among members of the
Democratic Party but spanning the political spectrum, downplayed di-
visions over slavery and ethnicity by embracing national unity and em-
phasizing American exceptionalism, territorial expansion, democratic
participation, and economic interdependence.2 Poet Ralph Waldo Emer-
son captured the political outlook of this new generation in a speech he
delivered in 1844 titled “The Young American”:

   In every age of the world, there has been a leading nation, one of a more
   generous sentiment, whose eminent citizens were willing to stand for the
   interests of general justice and humanity, at the risk of being called, by
   the men of the moment, chimerical and fantastic. Which should be that
   nation but these States? Which should lead that movement, if not New
   England? Who should lead the leaders, but the Young American?3

    However, many Americans, including Emerson, disapproved of ag-
gressive expansion. For opponents of manifest destiny, the lofty rhetoric
of the Young Americans was nothing other than a kind of imperialism
that the American Revolution was supposed to have repudiated.4 Many
members of the Whig Party (and later the Republican Party) argued that
the United States’ mission was to lead by example, not by conquest.
Abraham Lincoln summed up this criticism with a fair amount of sar-
casm during a speech in 1859:

   He (the Young American) owns a large part of the world, by right of pos-
   sessing it; and all the rest by right of wanting it, and intending to have it.
   . . . Young America had “a pleasing hope—a fond desire—a longing after”
   territory. He has a great passion—a perfect rage—for the “new”; particu-
   larly new men for office, and the new earth mentioned in the revelations,
   in which, being no more sea, there must be about three times as much land
   as in the present. He is a great friend of humanity; and his desire for land
   is not selfish, but merely an impulse to extend the area of freedom. He is
   very anxious to fight for the liberation of enslaved nations and colonies,
   provided, always, they have land. . . . As to those who have no land, and
   would be glad of help from any quarter, he considers they can afford to
   wait a few hundred years longer. In knowledge he is particularly rich. He
   knows all that can possibly be known; inclines to believe in spiritual trap-
   pings, and is the unquestioned inventor of “Manifest Destiny.”5



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
318                                                                                        chapter 12




Artistic propaganda like this promoted the national project of manifest destiny. Columbia, the female figure
of America, leads Americans into the West and into the future by carrying the values of republicanism (as
seen through her Roman garb) and progress (shown through the inclusion of technological innovations like
the telegraph) and clearing native peoples and animals, seen being pushed into the darkness. John Gast,
American Progress, 1872. Wikimedia.



                          But Lincoln and other anti-expansionists would struggle to win pop-
                      ular opinion. The nation, fueled by the principles of manifest destiny,
                      would continue westward. Along the way, Americans battled both na-
                      tive peoples and foreign nations, claiming territory to the very edges of
                      the continent. But westward expansion did not come without a cost. It
                      exacerbated the slavery question, pushed Americans toward civil war,
                      and, ultimately, threatened the very mission of American democracy it
                      was designed to aid.


                      II. Antebellum Western Migration and Indian Removal
                      After the War of 1812, Americans settled the Great Lakes region rapidly
                      thanks in part to aggressive land sales by the federal government.6 Mis-



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  319


souri’s admission as a slave state presented the first major crisis over
westward migration and American expansion in the antebellum period.
Farther north, lead and iron ore mining spurred development in Wis-
consin.7 By the 1830s and 1840s, increasing numbers of German and
Scandinavian immigrants joined easterners in settling the Upper Missis-
sippi watershed.8 Little settlement occurred west of Missouri as migrants
viewed the Great Plains as a barrier to farming. Farther west, the Rocky
Mountains loomed as undesirable to all but fur traders, and all American
Indians west of the Mississippi appeared too powerful to allow for white
expansion.
    “Do not lounge in the cities!” commanded publisher Horace Greeley
in 1841, “There is room and health in the country, away from the crowds
of idlers and imbeciles. Go west, before you are fitted for no life but
that of the factory.”9 The New York Tribune often argued that Ameri-
can exceptionalism required the United States to benevolently conquer
the continent as the prime means of spreading American capitalism and
American democracy. However, the vast West was not empty. American
Indians controlled much of the land east of the Mississippi River and
almost all of the West. Expansion hinged on a federal policy of Indian
removal.
    The harassment and dispossession of American Indians—whether
driven by official U.S. government policy or the actions of individual
Americans and their communities—depended on the belief in manifest
destiny. Of course, a fair bit of racism was part of the equation as well.
The political and legal processes of expansion always hinged on the belief
that white Americans could best use new lands and opportunities. This
belief rested on the idea that only Americans embodied the democratic
ideals of yeoman agriculturalism extolled by Thomas Jefferson and ex-
panded under Jacksonian democracy.
    Florida was an early test case for the Americanization of new lands.
The territory held strategic value for the young nation’s growing economic
and military interests in the Caribbean. The most important factors that
led to the annexation of Florida included anxieties over runaway slaves,
Spanish neglect of the region, and the desired defeat of Native American
tribes who controlled large portions of lucrative farm territory.
    During the early nineteenth century, Spain wanted to increase pro-
ductivity in Florida and encouraged migration of mostly southern slave
owners. By the second decade of the 1800s, Anglo settlers occupied
plantations along the St. Johns River, from the border with Georgia



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
320                                                                       chapter 12


             to Lake George a hundred miles upstream. Spain began to lose con-
             trol as the area quickly became a haven for slave smugglers bringing
             illicit human cargo into the United States for lucrative sale to Georgia
             planters. Plantation owners grew apprehensive about the growing num-
             bers of slaves running to the swamps and Indian-controlled areas of
             Florida. American slave owners pressured the U.S. government to con-
             front the Spanish authorities. Southern slave owners refused to quietly
             accept the continued presence of armed black men in Florida. During
             the War of 1812, a ragtag assortment of Georgia slave owners joined
             by a plethora of armed opportunists raided Spanish and British-owned
             plantations along the St. Johns River. These private citizens received
             U.S. government help on July 27, 1816, when U.S. army regulars at-
             tacked the Negro Fort (established as an armed outpost during the war
             by the British and located about sixty miles south of the Georgia bor-
             der). The raid killed 270 of the fort’s inhabitants as a result of a direct
             hit on the fort’s gunpowder stores. This conflict set the stage for General
             Andrew Jackson’s invasion of Florida in 1817 and the beginning of the
             First Seminole War.10
                  Americans also held that Creek and Seminole Indians, occupying the
             area from the Apalachicola River to the wet prairies and hammock islands
             of central Florida, were dangers in their own right. These tribes, known
             to the Americans collectively as Seminoles, migrated into the region over
             the course of the eighteenth century and established settlements, tilled
             fields, and tended herds of cattle in the rich floodplains and grasslands
             that dominated the northern third of the Florida peninsula. Envious eyes
             looked upon these lands. After bitter conflict that often pitted Americans
             against a collection of Native Americans and former slaves, Spain even-
             tually agreed to transfer the territory to the United States. The resulting
             Adams-Onís Treaty exchanged Florida for $5 million and other territo-
             rial concessions elsewhere.11
                  After the purchase, planters from the Carolinas, Georgia, and Vir-
             ginia entered Florida. However, the influx of settlers into the Florida ter-
             ritory was temporarily halted in the mid-1830s by the outbreak of the
             Second Seminole War (1835–1842). Free black men and women and es-
             caped slaves also occupied the Seminole district, a situation that deeply
             troubled slave owners. Indeed, General Thomas Sidney Jesup, U.S. com-
             mander during the early stages of the Second Seminole War, labeled that
             conflict “a negro, not an Indian War,” fearful as he was that if the revolt
             “was not speedily put down, the South will feel the effect of it on their



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  321


slave population before the end of the next season.”12 Florida became a
state in 1845 and settlement expanded into the former Indian lands.
    American action in Florida seized Indians’ eastern lands, reduced
lands available for runaway slaves, and killed entirely or removed Indian
peoples farther west. This became the template for future action. Presi-
dents, since at least Thomas Jefferson, had long discussed removal, but
President Andrew Jackson took the most dramatic action. Jackson be-
lieved, “It [speedy removal] will place a dense and civilized population in
large tracts of country now occupied by a few savage hunters.”13 Desires
to remove American Indians from valuable farmland motivated state and
federal governments to cease trying to assimilate Indians and instead plan
for forced removal.
    Congress passed the Indian Removal Act in 1830, thereby grant-
ing the president authority to begin treaty negotiations that would give
American Indians land in the West in exchange for their lands east of the
Mississippi. Many advocates of removal, including President Jackson,
paternalistically claimed that it would protect Indian communities from
outside influences that jeopardized their chances of becoming “civilized”
farmers. Jackson emphasized this paternalism—the belief that the gov-
ernment was acting in the best interest of Native peoples—in his 1830
State of the Union Address. “It [removal] will separate the Indians from
immediate contact with settlements of whites . . . and perhaps cause them
gradually, under the protection of the Government and through the in-
fluence of good counsels, to cast off their savage habits and become an
interesting, civilized, and Christian community.”14
    The experience of the Cherokee was particularly brutal. Despite many
tribal members adopting some Euro-American ways, including intensified
agriculture, slave ownership, and Christianity, state and federal govern-
ments pressured the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Cherokee Nations
to sign treaties and surrender land. Many of these tribal nations used the
law in hopes of protecting their lands. Most notable among these efforts
was the Cherokee Nation’s attempt to sue the state of Georgia.
    Beginning in 1826, Georgian officials asked the federal government
to negotiate with the Cherokee to secure lucrative lands. The Adams
administration resisted the state’s request, but harassment from local
settlers against the Cherokee forced the Adams and Jackson adminis-
trations to begin serious negotiations with the Cherokee. Georgia grew
impatient with the process of negotiation and abolished existing state
agreements with the Cherokee that had guaranteed rights of movement



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
322                                                                       chapter 12


             and ­jurisdiction of tribal law. Andrew Jackson penned a letter soon after
             taking office that encouraged the Cherokee, among others, to voluntarily
             relocate to the West. The discovery of gold in Georgia in the fall of 1829
             further antagonized the situation.
                 The Cherokee defended themselves against Georgia’s laws by citing
             treaties signed with the United States that guaranteed the Cherokee Na-
             tion both their land and independence. The Cherokee appealed to the Su-
             preme Court against Georgia to prevent dispossession. The Court, while
             sympathizing with the Cherokee’s plight, ruled that it lacked jurisdiction
             to hear the case (Cherokee Nation v. Georgia [1831]). In an associated
             case, Worcester v. Georgia (1832), the Supreme Court ruled that Georgia
             laws did not apply within Cherokee territory.15 Regardless of these rul-
             ings, the state government ignored the Supreme Court and did little to
             prevent conflict between settlers and the Cherokee.
                 Jackson wanted a solution that might preserve peace and his reputa-
             tion. He sent secretary of war Lewis Cass to offer title to western lands
             and the promise of tribal governance in exchange for relinquishing of
             the Cherokee’s eastern lands. These negotiations opened a rift within the
             Cherokee Nation. Cherokee leader John Ridge believed removal was in-
             evitable and pushed for a treaty that would give the best terms. Others,
             called nationalists and led by John Ross, refused to consider removal
             in negotiations. The Jackson administration refused any deal that fell
             short of large-scale removal of the Cherokee from Georgia, thereby fuel-
             ing a devastating and violent intratribal battle between the two factions.
             Eventually tensions grew to the point that several treaty advocates were
             assassinated by members of the national faction.16
                 In 1835, a portion of the Cherokee Nation led by John Ridge, hoping
             to prevent further tribal bloodshed, signed the Treaty of New Echota.
             This treaty ceded lands in Georgia for $5 million and, the signatories
             hoped, limiting future conflicts between the Cherokee and white settlers.
             However, most of the tribe refused to adhere to the terms, viewing the
             treaty as illegitimately negotiated. In response, John Ross pointed out the
             U.S. government’s hypocrisy. “You asked us to throw off the hunter and
             warrior state: We did so—you asked us to form a republican government:
             We did so. Adopting your own as our model. You asked us to cultivate
             the earth, and learn the mechanic arts. We did so. You asked us to learn
             to read. We did so. You asked us to cast away our idols and worship your
             god. We did so. Now you demand we cede to you our lands. That we
             will not do.”17



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  323


    President Martin van Buren, in 1838, decided to press the issue be-
yond negotiation and court rulings and used the New Echota Treaty pro-
visions to order the army to forcibly remove those Cherokee not obeying
the treaty’s cession of territory. Harsh weather, poor planning, and dif-
ficult travel compounded the tragedy of what became known as the Trail
of Tears. Sixteen thousand Cherokee embarked on the journey; only ten
thousand completed it.18 Not every instance was of removal was as treach-
erous or demographically disastrous as the Cherokee example, while, on
the other hand, some tribes violently resisted removal. Regardless, over
sixty thousand Indians were forced west prior to the Civil War.19
    The allure of manifest destiny encouraged expansion regardless of
terrain or locale, and Indian removal also took place, to a lesser degree,
in northern lands. In the Old Northwest, Odawa and Ojibwe communi-
ties in Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota resisted removal as many
lived on land north of desirable farming land. Moreover, some Ojibwe
and Odawa individuals purchased land independently. They formed suc-
cessful alliances with missionaries to help advocate against removal, as
well as with some traders and merchants who depended on trade with
Native peoples. Yet Indian removal occurred in the North as well—the
Black Hawk War in 1832, for instance, led to the removal of many Sauk
to Kansas.20
    Despite the disaster of removal, tribal nations slowly rebuilt their
cultures and in some cases even achieved prosperity in Indian Territory.
Tribal nations blended traditional cultural practices, including common
land systems, with western practices including constitutional govern-
ments, common school systems, and creating an elite slaveholding class.
    Some Indian groups remained too powerful to remove. Beginning in
the late eighteenth century, the Comanche rose to power in the Southern
Plains region of what is now the southwestern United States. By quickly
adapting to the horse culture first introduced by the Spanish, the Co-
manche transitioned from a foraging economy into a mixed hunting
and pastoral society. After 1821, the new Mexican nation-state claimed
the region as part of the northern Mexican frontier, but they had little
control. Instead, the Comanche remained in power and controlled the
economy of the Southern Plains. A flexible political structure allowed
the Comanche to dominate other Indian groups as well as Mexican and
American settlers.
    In the 1830s, the Comanche launched raids into northern Mexico, end-
ing what had been an unprofitable but peaceful diplomatic ­relationship



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
324                                                                               chapter 12


                     with Mexico. At the same time, they forged new trading relationships
                     with Anglo-American traders in Texas. Throughout this period, the Co-
                     manche and several other independent Native groups, particularly the
                     Kiowa, Apache, and Navajo, engaged in thousands of violent encoun-
                     ters with northern Mexicans. Collectively, these encounters comprised
                     an ongoing war during the 1830s and 1840s as tribal nations vied for
                     power and wealth. By the 1840s, Comanche power peaked with an em-
                     pire that controlled a vast territory in the trans-Mississippi west known
                     as Comancheria. By trading in Texas and raiding in northern Mexico,
                     the Comanche controlled the flow of commodities, including captives,
                     livestock, and trade goods. They practiced a fluid system of captivity and
                     captive trading, rather than a rigid chattel system. The Comanche used
                     captives for economic exploitation but also adopted captives into kin-
                     ship networks. This allowed for the assimilation of diverse peoples in the
                     region into the empire. The ongoing conflict in the region had sweeping
                     consequences on both Mexican and American politics. The U.S.-Mexican
Map of the Plains    War, beginning in 1846, can be seen as a culmination of this violence.21
Indians, undated.
Smithsonian
                         In the Great Basin region, Mexican independence also escalated pat-
Institution.         terns of violence. This region, on the periphery of the Spanish empire,




               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  325


was nonetheless integrated in the vast commercial trading network of the
West. Mexican officials and Anglo-American traders entered the region
with their own imperial designs. New forms of violence spread into the
homelands of the Paiute and Western Shoshone. Traders, settlers, and
Mormon religious refugees, aided by U.S. officials and soldiers, commit-
ted daily acts of violence and laid the groundwork for violent conquest.
This expansion of the American state into the Great Basin meant groups
such as the Ute, Cheyenne, and Arapahoe had to compete over land, re-
sources, captives, and trade relations with Anglo-Americans. Eventually,
white incursion and ongoing Indian wars resulted in traumatic disposses-
sion of land and the struggle for subsistence.
    The federal government attempted more than relocation of Ameri-
can Indians. Policies to “civilize” Indians coexisted along with forced
removal and served an important “Americanizing” vision of expansion
that brought an ever-increasing population under the American flag and
sought to balance aggression with the uplift of paternal care. Thomas L.
McKenney, superintendent of Indian trade from 1816 to 1822 and the
Superintendent of Indian Affairs from 1824 to 1830, served as the main
architect of the civilization policy. He asserted that American Indians
were morally and intellectually equal to whites. He sought to establish a
national Indian school system.
    Congress rejected McKenney’s plan but instead passed the Civiliza-
tion Fund Act in 1819. This act offered $10,000 annually to be allocated
toward societies that funded missionaries to establish schools among In-
dian tribes. However, providing schooling for American Indians under
the auspices of the civilization program also allowed the federal govern-
ment to justify taking more land. Treaties, such as the 1820 Treaty of Do-
ak’s Stand made with the Choctaw nation, often included land cessions
as requirements for education provisions. Removal and Americanization
reinforced Americans’ sense of cultural dominance.22
    After removal in the 1830s, the Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw
began to collaborate with missionaries to build school systems of their
own. Leaders hoped education would help ensuing generations to pro-
tect political sovereignty. In 1841, the Cherokee Nation opened a public
school system that within two years included eighteen schools. By 1852,
the system expanded to twenty-one schools with a national enrollment
of 1,100 pupils.23 Many of the students educated in these tribally con-
trolled schools later served their nations as teachers, lawyers, physicians,
bureaucrats, and politicians.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
326                                                                       chapter 12



             III. Life and Culture in the West
             The dream of creating a democratic utopia in the West ultimately rested
             on those who picked up their possessions and their families and moved
             west. Western settlers usually migrated as families and settled along navi-
             gable and potable rivers. Settlements often coalesced around local tradi-
             tions, especially religion, carried from eastern settlements. These shared
             understandings encouraged a strong sense of cooperation among western
             settlers that forged communities on the frontier.
                 Before the Mexican War, the West for most Americans still referred
             to the fertile area between the Appalachian Mountains and the Missis-
             sippi River with a slight amount of overspill beyond its banks. With soil
             exhaustion and land competition increasing in the East, most early west-
             ern migrants sought a greater measure of stability and self-sufficiency by
             engaging in small-scale farming. Boosters of these new agricultural areas
             along with the U.S. government encouraged perceptions of the West as
             a land of hard-built opportunity that promised personal and national
             bounty.
                 Women migrants bore the unique double burden of travel while also
             being expected to conform to restrictive gender norms. The key virtues
             of femininity, according to the “cult of true womanhood,” included
             piety, purity, domesticity, and submissiveness. The concept of “separate
             spheres” expected women to remain in the home. These values accompa-
             nied men and women as they traveled west to begin their new lives.
                 While many of these societal standards endured, there often existed
             an openness of frontier society that resulted in modestly more opportuni-
             ties for women. Husbands needed partners in setting up a homestead and
             working in the field to provide food for the family. Suitable wives were
             often in short supply, enabling some to informally negotiate more power
             in their households.24
                 Americans debated the role of government in westward expansion.
             This debate centered on the proper role of the U.S. government in paying
             for the internal improvements that soon became necessary to encourage
             and support economic development. Some saw frontier development as a
             self-driven undertaking that necessitated private risk and investment de-
             void of government interference. Others saw the federal government’s role
             as providing the infrastructural development needed to give migrants the
             push toward engagement with the larger national economy. In the end,
             federal aid proved essential for the conquest and settlement of the region.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  327




                                                       American artist George Catlin traveled west
                                                       to paint Native Americans. In 1832, he
                                                       painted Eeh-nís-kim, Crystal Stone, wife of a
                                                       Blackfoot leader. Smithsonian American Art
                                                       Museum.




    Economic busts constantly threatened western farmers and commu-
nities. The economy worsened after the Panic of 1819. Falling prices
and depleted soil meant farmers were unable to make their loan pay-
ments. The dream of subsistence and stability abruptly ended as many
migrants lost their land and felt the hand of the distant market economy
forcing them even farther west to escape debt. As a result, the federal
government consistently sought to increase access to land in the West,
including efforts to lower the amount of land required for purchase.
Smaller lots made it easier for more farmers to clear land and begin
farming faster.25
    More than anything else, new roads and canals provided conduits
for migration and settlement. Improvements in travel and exchange fu-
eled economic growth in the 1820s and 1830s. Canal improvements ex-
panded in the East, while road building prevailed in the West. Congress
continued to allocate funds for internal improvements. Federal money
pushed the National Road, begun in 1811, farther west every year. La-
borers needed to construct these improvements increased employment
opportunities and encouraged nonfarmers to move to the West. Wealth
promised by engagement with the new economy was hard to reject.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
328                                                                       chapter 12


             ­ owever, roads were expensive to build and maintain, and some Ameri-
             H
             cans strongly opposed spending money on these improvements.
                 The use of steamboats grew quickly throughout the 1810s and into
             the 1820s. As water trade and travel grew in popularity, local, state,
             and federal funds helped connect rivers and streams. Hundreds of miles
             of new canals cut through the eastern landscape. The most notable of
             these early projects was the Erie Canal. That project, completed in 1825,
             linked the Great Lakes to New York City. The profitability of the canal
             helped New York outpace its East Coast rivals to become the center for
             commercial import and export in the United States.26
                 Early railroads like the Baltimore and Ohio line hoped to link mid-
             Atlantic cities with lucrative western trade routes. Railroad boosters en-
             couraged the rapid growth of towns and cities along their routes. Not
             only did rail lines promise to move commerce faster, but the rails also
             encouraged the spreading of towns farther away from traditional water-
             way locations. Technological limitations, constant repairs, conflicts with
             American Indians, and political disagreements all hampered railroading
             and kept canals and steamboats as integral parts of the transportation
             system. Nonetheless, this early establishment of railroads enabled a rapid
             expansion after the Civil War.
                 Economic chains of interdependence stretched over hundreds of miles
             of land and through thousands of contracts and remittances. America’s
             manifest destiny became wedded not only to territorial expansion but
             also to economic development.27


             IV. Texas, Mexico, and America
             The debate over slavery became one of the prime forces behind the Texas
             Revolution and the resulting republic’s annexation to the United States.
             After gaining its independence from Spain in 1821, Mexico hoped to
             attract new settlers to its northern areas to create a buffer between it
             and the powerful Comanche. New immigrants, mostly from the south-
             ern United States, poured into Mexican Texas. Over the next twenty-five
             years, concerns over growing Anglo influence and possible American de-
             signs on the area produced great friction between Mexicans and the for-
             mer Americans in the area. In 1829, Mexico, hoping to quell both anger
             and immigration, outlawed slavery and required all new immigrants to
             convert to Catholicism. American immigrants, eager to expand their ag-
             ricultural fortunes, largely ignored these requirements. In response, Mex-



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  329


ican authorities closed their territory to any new immigration in 1830—a
prohibition ignored by Americans who often squatted on public lands.28
    In 1834, an internal conflict between federalists and centralists in the
Mexican government led to the political ascendency of General Antonio
López de Santa Anna. Santa Anna, governing as a dictator, repudiated
the federalist Constitution of 1824, pursued a policy of authoritarian
central control, and crushed several revolts throughout Mexico. Anglo
settlers in Mexican Texas, or Texians as they called themselves, opposed
Santa Anna’s centralizing policies and met in November. They issued a
statement of purpose that emphasized their commitment to the Constitu-
tion of 1824 and declared Texas to be a separate state within Mexico.
After the Mexican government angrily rejected the offer, Texian leaders
soon abandoned their fight for the Constitution of 1824 and declared
independence on March 2, 1836.29 The Texas Revolution of 1835–1836
was a successful secessionist movement in the northern district of the
Mexican state of Coahuila y Tejas that resulted in an independent Re-
public of Texas.
    At the Alamo and Goliad, Santa Anna crushed smaller rebel forces
and massacred hundreds of Texian prisoners. The Mexican army pursued
the retreating Texian army deep into East Texas, spurring a mass panic
and evacuation by American civilians known as the Runaway Scrape.
The confident Santa Anna consistently failed to make adequate defensive
preparations, an oversight that eventually led to a surprise attack from
the outnumbered Texian army led by Sam Houston on April 21, 1836.
The battle of San Jacinto lasted only eighteen minutes and resulted in
a decisive victory for the Texians, who retaliated for previous Mexican
atrocities by killing fleeing and surrendering Mexican soldiers for hours
after the initial assault. Santa Anna was captured in the aftermath and
compelled to sign the Treaty of Velasco on May 14, 1836, by which he
agreed to withdraw his army from Texas and acknowledged Texas in-
dependence. Although a new Mexican government never recognized the
Republic of Texas, the United States and several other nations gave the
new country diplomatic recognition.30
    Texas annexation had remained a political landmine since the Repub-
lic declared independence from Mexico in 1836. American politicians
feared that adding Texas to the Union would provoke a war with Mexico
and reignite sectional tensions by throwing off the balance between free
and slave states. However, after his expulsion from the Whig party, Presi-
dent John Tyler saw Texas statehood as the key to saving his ­political



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
330                                                                         chapter 12


             career. In 1842, he began work on opening annexation to national de-
             bate. Harnessing public outcry over the issue, Democrat James K. Polk
             rose from virtual obscurity to win the presidential election of 1844. Polk
             and his party campaigned on promises of westward expansion, with eyes
             toward Texas, Oregon, and California. In the final days of his presidency,
             Tyler at last extended an official offer to Texas on March 3, 1845. The
             republic accepted on July 4, becoming the twenty-eighth state.
                 Mexico denounced annexation as “an act of aggression, the most un-
             just which can be found recorded in the annals of modern history.”31
             Beyond the anger produced by annexation, the two nations both laid
             claim over a narrow strip of land between two rivers. Mexico drew the
             southwestern border of Texas at the Nueces River, but Texans claimed
             that the border lay roughly 150 miles farther west at the Rio Grande.
             Neither claim was realistic since the sparsely populated area, known as
             the Nueces strip, was in fact controlled by Native Americans.
                 In November 1845, President Polk secretly dispatched John Slidell
             to Mexico City to purchase the Nueces strip along with large sections of
             New Mexico and California. The mission was an empty gesture, designed
             largely to pacify those in Washington who insisted on diplomacy before
             war. Predictably, officials in Mexico City refused to receive Slidell. In
             preparation for the assumed failure of the negotiations, Polk preemptively
             sent a four-thousand-man army under General Zachary Taylor to Corpus
             Christi, Texas, just northeast of the Nueces River. Upon word of Slidell’s
             rebuff in January 1846, Polk ordered Taylor to cross into the disputed ter-
             ritory. The president hoped that this show of force would push the lands of
             California onto the bargaining table as well. Unfortunately, he badly mis-
             read the situation. After losing Texas, the Mexican public strongly opposed
             surrendering any more ground to the United States. Popular opinion left
             the shaky government in Mexico City without room to negotiate. On April
             24, Mexican cavalrymen attacked a detachment of Taylor’s troops in the
             disputed territory just north of the Rio Grande, killing eleven U.S. soldiers.
                 It took two weeks for the news to reach Washington. Polk sent a
             message to Congress on May 11 that summed up the assumptions and
             intentions of the United States.

                Instead of this, however, we have been exerting our best efforts to propiti-
                ate her good will. Upon the pretext that Texas, a nation as independent
                as herself, thought proper to unite its destinies with our own, she has
                affected to believe that we have severed her rightful territory, and in of-
                ficial proclamations and manifestoes has repeatedly threatened to make



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  331


   war upon us for the purpose of reconquering Texas. In the meantime we
   have tried every effort at reconciliation. The cup of forbearance had been
   exhausted even before the recent information from the frontier of the Del
   Norte. But now, after reiterated menaces, Mexico has passed the bound-
   ary of the United States, has invaded our territory and shed American
   blood upon the American soil. She has proclaimed that hostilities have
   commenced, and that the two nations are now at war.32

     The cagey Polk knew that since hostilities already existed, political
 dissent would be dangerous—a vote against war became a vote against
 supporting American soldiers under fire. Congress passed a declaration
 of war on May 13. Only a few members of both parties, notably John
 Quincy Adams and John C. Calhoun, opposed the measure. Upon declar-
 ing war in 1846, Congress issued a call for fifty thousand volunteer sol-
 diers. Spurred by promises of adventure and conquest abroad, thousands
 of eager men flocked to assembly points across the country.33 However,
 opposition to “Mr. Polk’s War” soon grew.
     In the early fall of 1846, the U.S. Army invaded Mexico on multiple
 fronts and within a year’s time General Winfield Scott’s men took control
 of Mexico City. However, the city’s fall did not bring an end to the war.
 Scott’s men occupied Mexico’s capital for over four months while the
 two countries negotiated. In the United States, the war had been con-
 troversial from the beginning. Embedded journalists sent back detailed
 reports from the front lines, and a divided press viciously debated the
 news. Volunteers found that war was not as they expected. Disease killed
 seven times as many American soldiers as combat.34 Harsh discipline,
conflict within the ranks, and violent clashes with civilians led soldiers to
desert in huge numbers. Peace finally came on February 2, 1848 with the
signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
     The United States gained lands that would become the future states
of California, Utah, and Nevada; most of Arizona; and parts of New
Mexico, Colorado, and Wyoming. Mexican officials would also have
to surrender their claims to Texas and recognize the Rio Grande as its
southern boundary. The United States offered $15 million for all of it.
With American soldiers occupying their capital, Mexican leaders had no
choice but to sign.
     The new American Southwest attracted a diverse group of entrepre-
neurs and settlers to the commercial towns of New Mexico, the fertile lands
of eastern Texas, the famed gold deposits of California, and the Rocky
­Mountains. This postwar migration built earlier paths dating back to the


         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
332                                                                               chapter 12




General Scott’s      1820s, when the lucrative Santa Fe trade enticed merchants to New Mexico
entrance into
Mexico. Litho-
                     and generous land grants brought numerous settlers to Texas. The Gads-
graph. 1851.         den Purchase of 1854 further added to American gains north of Mexico.
Originally pub-          The U.S.-Mexican War had an enormous impact on both countries.
lished in George
Wilkins Kendall      The American victory helped set the United States on the path to be-
and Carl Nebel,      coming a world power. It elevated Zachary Taylor to the presidency and
The War between
the United States    served as a training ground for many of the Civil War’s future command-
and Mexico           ers. Most significantly, however, Mexico lost roughly half of its territory.
Illustrated, Em-
bracing Pictorial
                     Yet the United States’ victory was not without danger. Ralph Waldo Em-
Drawings of all      erson, an outspoken critic, predicted ominously at the beginning of the
the Principal        conflict, “We will conquer Mexico, but it will be as the man who swal-
Conflicts (New
York: Appleton),     lows the arsenic which will bring him down in turn. Mexico will poison
1851. Wikimedia      us.”35 Indeed, the conflict over whether to extend slavery into the newly
Commons.
                     won territory pushed the nation ever closer to disunion and civil war.


                     V. Manifest Destiny and the Gold Rush
                     California, belonging to Mexico prior to the war, was at least three ar-
                     duous months’ travel from the nearest American settlements. There was
                     some sparse settlement in the Sacramento Valley, and missionaries made
                     the trip occasionally. The fertile farmland of Oregon, like the black dirt

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  333




The great environmental and economic potential of the Oregon Territory led many to pack up their families
and head west along the Oregon Trail. The trail represented the hopes of many for a better life, represented
and reinforced by images like Bierstadt’s idealistic Oregon Trail. Albert Bierstadt, Oregon Trail (Campfire),
1863. Wikimedia.

lands of the Mississippi Valley, attracted more settlers than California.
Dramatized stories of Indian attacks filled migrants with a sense of fore-
boding, although most settlers encountered no violence and often no In-
dians at all. The slow progress, disease, human and oxen starvation, poor
trails, terrible geographic preparations, lack of guidebooks, threatening
wildlife, vagaries of weather, and general confusion were all more for-
midable and frequent than Indian attacks. Despite the harshness of the
journey, by 1848 approximately twenty thousand Americans were living
west of the Rockies, with about three fourths of that number in Oregon.
    Many who moved nurtured a romantic vision of life, attracting more
Americans who sought more than agricultural life and familial responsi-
bilities. The rugged individualism and military prowess of the West, en-
capsulated for some by service in the Mexican war, drew a growing new
breed west of the Sierra Nevada to meet with the Californians already
there: a breed of migrants different from the modest agricultural com-
munities of the near West.
    If the great draw of the West served as manifest destiny’s kindling,
then the discovery of gold in California was the spark that set the fire

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
334                                                                       chapter 12


             ablaze. Most western settlers sought land ownership, but the lure of get-
             ting rich quick drew younger single men (with some women) to gold
             towns throughout the West. These adventurers and fortune-seekers then
             served as magnets for the arrival of others providing services associated
             with the gold rush. Towns and cities grew rapidly throughout the West,
             notably San Francisco, whose population grew from about five hundred
             in 1848 to almost fifty thousand by 1853. Lawlessness, predictable fail-
             ure of most fortune seekers, racial conflicts, and the slavery question all
             threatened manifest destiny’s promises.
                 On January 24, 1848, James W. Marshall, a contractor hired by John
             Sutter, discovered gold on Sutter’s sawmill land in the Sacramento Val-
             ley area of the California Territory. Throughout the 1850s, Californians
             beseeched Congress for a transcontinental railroad to provide service for
             both passengers and goods from the Midwest and the East Coast. The
             potential economic benefits for communities along proposed railroads
             made the debate over the route rancorous. Growing dissent over the slav-
             ery issue also heightened tensions.
                 The great influx of diverse people clashed in a combative and aggran-
             dizing atmosphere of individualistic pursuit of fortune.36 Linguistic, cul-
             tural, economic, and racial conflict roiled both urban and rural areas. By
             the end of the 1850s, Chinese and Mexican immigrants made up one fifth
             of the mining population in California. The ethnic patchwork of these
             frontier towns belied a clearly defined socioeconomic arrangement that
             saw whites on top as landowners and managers, with poor whites and
             ethnic minorities working the mines and assorted jobs. The competition
             for land, resources, and riches furthered individual and collective abuses,
             particularly against Indians and older Mexican communities. Califor-
             nia’s towns, as well as those dotting the landscape throughout the West,
             such as Coeur D’Alene in Idaho and Tombstone in Arizona, struggled to
             balance security with economic development and the protection of civil
             rights and liberties.


             VI. The Monroe Doctrine and Manifest Destiny
             The expansion of influence and territory off the continent became an
             important corollary to westward expansion. The U.S. government sought
             to keep European countries out of the Western Hemisphere and applied
             the principles of manifest destiny to the rest of the hemisphere. As secre-
             tary of state for President James Monroe, John Quincy Adams held the



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  335




This cartoon depicts a highly racialized image of a Chinese immigrant and Irish immigrant “swallowing”
the United States—in the form of Uncle Sam. Networks of railroads and the promise of American expan-
sion can be seen in the background. The great fear of the period That Uncle Sam may be swallowed by
foreigners : The problem solved, 1860–1869. Library of Congress.



responsibility for the satisfactory resolution of ongoing border disputes
between the United States, England, Spain, and Russia. Adams’s view
of American foreign policy was put into clearest practice in the Monroe
Doctrine, which he had great influence in crafting.
    Increasingly aggressive incursions from Russians in the Northwest,
ongoing border disputes with the British in Canada, the remote possibil-
ity of Spanish reconquest of South America, and British abolitionism in
the Caribbean all triggered an American response. In a speech before
the U.S. House of Representatives on July 4, 1821, Secretary of State
Adams acknowledged the American need for a robust foreign policy that



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
336                                                                         chapter 12


             s­imultaneously protected and encouraged the nation’s growing and in-
              creasingly dynamic economy.

                America . . . in the lapse of nearly half a century, without a single ex-
                ception, respected the independence of other nations while asserting and
                maintaining her own. . . . She is the well-wisher to the freedom and in-
                dependence of all. . . . She well knows that by once enlisting under other
                banners than her own, were they even the banners of foreign indepen-
                dence, she would involve herself beyond the power of extrication, in all
                the wars of interest and intrigue, of individual avarice, envy, and ambi-
                tion, which assume the colors and usurp the standard of freedom. The
                fundamental maxims of her policy would insensibly change from liberty
                to force. The frontlet on her brows would no longer beam with the in-
                effable splendor of freedom and independence; but in its stead would
                soon be substituted an imperial diadem, flashing in false and tarnished
                lustre the murky radiance of dominion and power. She might become
                the dictatress of the world; she would be no longer the ruler of her own
                spirit. . . . Her glory is not dominion, but liberty. Her march is the march
                of the mind. She has a spear and a shield: but the motto upon her shield
                is, Freedom, Independence, Peace. This has been her Declaration: this has
                been, as far as her necessary intercourse with the rest of mankind would
                permit, her practice.37

                 Adams’s great fear was not territorial loss. He had no doubt that Rus-
             sian and British interests in North America could be arrested. Adams held
             no reason to antagonize the Russians with grand pronouncements, nor
             was he generally called upon to do so. He enjoyed a good relationship with
             the Russian ambassador and stewarded through Congress most-favored
             trade status for the Russians in 1824. Rather, Adams worried gravely
             about the ability of the United States to compete commercially with the
             British in Latin America and the Caribbean. This concern deepened with
             the valid concern that America’s chief Latin American trading partner,
             Cuba, dangled perilously close to outstretched British claws. Cabinet de-
             bates surrounding establishment of the Monroe Doctrine and geopolitical
             events in the Caribbean focused attention on that part of the world as key
             to the future defense of U.S. military and commercial interests, the main
             threat to those interests being the British. Expansion of economic oppor-
             tunity and protection from foreign pressures became the overriding goals
             of U.S. foreign policy.38 But despite the philosophical confidence pres-
             ent in the Monroe administration’s decree, the reality of limited military
             power kept the Monroe Doctrine as an aspirational assertion.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  337


    Bitter disagreements over the expansion of slavery into the new lands
won from Mexico began even before the war ended. Many northern
businessmen and southern slave owners supported the idea of expanding
slavery into the Caribbean as a useful alternative to continental expan-
sion, since slavery already existed in these areas. Some were critical of
these attempts, seeing them as evidence of a growing slave-power con-
spiracy. Many others supported attempts at expansion, like those pre-
viously seen in eastern Florida, even if these attempts were not exactly
legal. Filibustering, as it was called, involved privately financed schemes
directed at capturing and occupying foreign territory without the ap-
proval of the U.S. government.
    Filibustering took greatest hold in the imagination of Americans as
they looked toward Cuba. Fears of racialized revolution in Cuba (as in
Haiti and Florida before it) as well as the presence of an aggressive British
abolitionist influence in the Caribbean energized the movement to annex
Cuba and encouraged filibustering as expedient alternatives to lethargic
official negotiations. Despite filibustering’s seemingly chaotic planning
and destabilizing repercussions, those intellectually and economically
guiding the effort imagined a willing and receptive Cuban population
and expected an agreeable American business class. In Cuba, manifest
destiny for the first time sought territory off the continent and hoped to
put a unique spin on the story of success in Mexico. Yet the annexation of
Cuba, despite great popularity and some military attempts led by Narciso
López, a Cuban dissident, never succeeded.39
    Other filibustering expeditions were launched elsewhere, including
two by William Walker, a former American soldier. Walker seized por-
tions of the Baja peninsula in Mexico and then later took power and es-
tablished a slaving regime in Nicaragua. Eventually Walker was executed
in Honduras.40 These missions violated the laws of the United States,
but wealthy Americans financed various filibusters, and less-wealthy ad-
venturers were all too happy to sign up. Filibustering enjoyed its brief
popularity into the late 1850s, at which point slavery and concerns over
secession came to the fore. By the opening of the Civil War, most saw
these attempts as simply territorial theft.


VII. Conclusion
Debates over expansion, economics, diplomacy, and manifest destiny ex-
posed some of the weaknesses of the American system. The chauvinism



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
338                                                                              chapter 12


             of policies like Native American removal, the Mexican War, and filibus-
             tering existed alongside growing anxiety. Manifest destiny attempted to
             make a virtue of America’s lack of history and turn it into the very basis
             of nationhood. To locate such origins, John O’Sullivan and other cham-
             pions of manifest destiny grafted biological and territorial imperatives—
             common among European definitions of nationalism—onto American
             political culture. The United States was the embodiment of the demo-
             cratic ideal, they said. Democracy had to be timeless, boundless, and
             portable. New methods of transportation and communication, the rapid-
             ity of the railroad and the telegraph, the rise of the international mar-
             ket economy, and the growth of the American frontier provided shared
             platforms to help Americans think across local identities and reaffirm a
             national character.


             VIII. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Joshua Beatty and Gregg Lightfoot, with content con-
             tributions by Ethan Bennett, Michelle Cassidy, Jonathan Grandage, Gregg Light-
             foot, Jose Juan Perez Melendez, Jessica Moore, Nick Roland, Matthew K. Saionz,
             Rowan Steinecker, Patrick Troester, and Ben Wright.
                 Recommended citation: Ethan Bennett et al., “Manifest Destiny,” Gregg
             Lightfoot, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright (Stan-
             ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

             N o t e s t o C h a p t e r 12
                  1. John O’Sullivan, “Annexation,” United States Magazine and Democratic
             Review 17, no. 1 (July–August 1845), 5.
                  2. Yonatan Eyal, The Young America Movement and the Transformation
             of the Democratic Party, 1828–1861 (New York: Cambridge University Press,
             2007).
                  3. Ralph Waldo Emerson, “The Young American: A Lecture Read Before
             the Mercantile Library Association, Boston, February 7, 1844.” http://​         www​
             .emersoncentral​.com/​youngam​.htm, accessed May 18, 2015.
                  4. See Peter S. Onuf, “Imperialism and Nationalism in the Early American
             Republic,” in Empire’s Twin: U.S. Anti-imperialism from the Founding Era to the
             Age of Terrorism, eds. Ian Tyrell and Jay Sexton (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
             Press, 2015), 21–40.
                  5. Abraham Lincoln, “Lecture on Discoveries and Inventions: First Delivered
             April 6, 1858.” http://​www​.abrahamlincolnonline​.org/​lincoln/​speeches/​discoveries​
             .htm, accessed May 18, 2015.
                  6. Edmund Jefferson Danziger, Great Lakes Indian Accommodation and Re-
             sistance During the Early Reservation (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
             2009), 11–13.


       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  339


     7. Malcolm J. Rohrbough, Trans-Appalachian Frontier, Third Edition: Peo-
ple, Societies, and Institutions, 1775–1850 (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 2008), 474–479.
     8. Mark Wyman, Immigrants in the Valley: Irish, Germans, and Americans
in the Upper Mississippi Country, 1830–1860 (Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press, 2016), 128, 148–149.
     9. Horace Greeley, New York Tribune, 1841. Although the phrase “Go west,
young man,” is often attributed to Greeley, the exhortation was most likely only
popularized by the newspaper editor in numerous speeches, letters, and editorials
and always in the larger context of the comparable and superior health, wealth,
and advantages to be had in the West.
     10. Robert V. Remini, Andrew Jackson: The Course of American Empire,
1767–1821 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977), 344–355.
     11. Francis Newton Thorpe, ed., The Federal and State Constitutions, Co-
lonial Charters, and Other Organic Laws of the States, Territories, and Colonies
Now or Heretofore Forming the United States of America Compiled and Edited
Under the Act of Congress of June 30, 1906 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1909).
     12. Thomas Sidney Jesup, quoted in Kenneth Wiggins Porter, “Negroes and
the Seminole War, 1835–1842,” Journal of Southern History 30, no. 4 (Novem-
ber 1964): 427.
     13. “President Andrew Jackson’s Message to Congress ‘On Indian Remo­
val’ (1830).” http://​www.ourdocuments​.gov/​doc​.php​?flash​=​true​&​doc​=​25​&​page​
=​tran​script, accessed May 26, 2015.
     14. Ibid.
     15. Tim A. Garrison, “Worcester v. Georgia (1832),” New Georgia Encyclo-
pedia. http://​www​.georgiaencyclopedia​.org/​articles/​government​-politics/​worcester​
-v​-georgia​-1832.
     16. Fay A. Yarbrough, Race and the Cherokee Nation: Sovereignty in the
Nineteenth Century (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008),
15–21.
     17. John Ross, quoted in Brian Hicks, Toward the Setting Sun: John Ross,
the Cherokees, and the Trail of Tears (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press,
2011), 210.
     18. Russell Thornton, The Cherokees: A Population History (Lincoln: Uni-
versity of Nebraska Press, 1990), 76.
     19. Senate Document #512, 23 Cong., 1 Sess. Vol. IV, p. x. https://​books​
.google​.com/​books​?id​=​KSTlvxxCOkcC​&​dq​=​60​,000​+removal​+indian​&​source​=​
gbs​_navlinks​_s.
     20. John P. Bowes, Land Too Good for Indians: Northern Indian Removal
(Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2016).
     21. Pekka Hämäläinen, The Comanche Empire (New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 2008).
     22. Samuel J. Wells, “Federal Indian Policy: From Accommodation to Re-
moval,” in Carolyn Reeves, ed., The Choctaw Before Removal (Jackson: Univer-
sity Press of Mississippi, 1985), 181–211.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
340                                                                              chapter 12


                  23. William C. Sturtevant, Handbook of North American Indians: History
             of Indian-White Relations, Vol. 4 (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution,
             1988), 289.
                  24. Adrienne Caughfield, True Women and Westward Expansion (College
             Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2005).
                  25. Murray Newton Rothbard, Panic of 1819: Reactions and Policies (New
             York: Columbia University Press, 1962).
                  26. Carol Sheriff, The Artificial River: The Erie Canal and the Paradox of
             Progress, 1817–1862 (New York: Hill and Wang, 1996).
                  27. For more on the technology and transportation revolutions, see Dan-
             iel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America,
             1815–1848 (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007).
                  28. David Reimers, Other Immigrants: The Global Origins of the American
             People (New York: New York University Press, 2005), 27.
                  29. H. P. N. Gammel, ed., The Laws of Texas, 1822–1897, Vol. 1 (Aus-
             tin, TX: Gammel, 1898), 1063. https://​texashistory​.unt​.edu/​ark:​/​67531/​metapth​
             5872/​m1/​1071/.
                  30. Randolph B. Campbell, An Empire for Slavery: The Peculiar Institution
             in Texas, 1821–1865 (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 1989).
                  31. Quoted in The Annual Register, or, a View of the History and Politics of
             the Year 1846, Volume 88 (Washington, DC: Rivington, 1847), 377.
                  32. James K. Polk, “President Polk’s Mexican War Message,” quoted in The
             Statesmen’s Manual: The Addresses and Messages of the Presidents of the United
             States, Inaugural, Annual, and Special, from 1789 to 1846: With a Memoir of
             Each of the Presidents and a History of Their Administrations; Also the Constitu-
             tion of the United States, and a Selection of Important Documents and Statistical
             Information, Vol. 2 (New York: Walker, 1847), 1489.
                  33. Amy S. Greenberg, Manifest Manhood and the Antebellum American
             Empire (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
                  34. James M. McCaffrey, Army of Manifest Destiny: The American Sol-
             dier in the Mexican War, 1846–1848 (New York: New York University Press,
             1992), 53.
                  35. Ralph Waldo Emerson, quoted in James McPherson, Battle Cry of Free-
             dom: The Civil War Era (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 51.
                  36. Susan Lee Johnson, Roaring Camp: The Social World of the California
             Gold Rush (New York: Norton, 2000).
                  37. John Quincy Adams, “Mr. Adams Oration, July 21, 1821,” quoted in
             Niles’ Weekly Register 20, (Baltimore: H. Niles, 1821), 332.
                  38. Gretchen Murphy, Hemispheric Imaginings: The Monroe Doctrine and
             Narratives of U.S. Empire (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009).
                  39. Tom Chaffin, Fatal Glory: Narciso López and the First Clandestine U.S.
             War Against Cuba (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 1996).
                  40. Anne F. Hyde, Empires, Nations, and Families: A History of the North
             American West, 1800–1860 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2011), 471.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Man i f e s t D e s t i n y  341



R e c omm e n d e d R e a di n g
Blackhawk, Ned. Violence over the Land: Indians and Empires in the Early
    American West. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008.
Brooks, James F. Captives and Cousins: Slavery, Kinship, and Community in
    the Southwest Borderlands. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
    2003.
Cusick, James G. The Other War of 1812: The Patriot War and the American
    Invasion of Spanish East Florida. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2007.
DeLay, Brian. War of a Thousand Deserts: Indian Raids and the U.S.-Mexican
    War. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Exley, Jo Ella Powell. Frontier Blood: The Saga of the Parker Family. College Sta-
    tion: Texas A&M University Press, 2005.
Gómez, Laura E. Manifest Destinies: The Making of the Mexican American
    Race. New York: New York University Press, 2008.
Gordon, Sarah Barringer. The Mormon Question: Polygamy and Constitutional
    Conflict in Nineteenth-Century America. Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 2001.
Greenberg, Amy S. Manifest Manhood and the Antebellum American Empire.
    Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Haas, Lisbeth. Conquest and Historical Identities in California, 1769–1936.
    Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
Hämäläinen, Pekka. The Comanche Empire. New Haven, CT: Yale University
    Press, 2008.
Holmes, Kenneth L. Covered Wagon Women: Diaries & Letters from the West-
    ern Trails, 1840–1849. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1995.
Horsman, Reginald. Race and Manifest Destiny: The Origins of American Racial
    Anglo-Saxonism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009.
Hyde, Anne F. Empires, Nations, and Families: A History of the North American
    West, 1800–1860. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2011.
Johnson, Susan Lee. Roaring Camp: The Social World of the California Gold
    Rush. New York: Norton, 2000.
Larson, John Lauritz. Internal Improvement: National Public Works and the
    Promise of Popular Government in the Early United States. Chapel Hill: Uni-
    versity of North Carolina Press, 2001.
Lazo, Rodrigo. Writing to Cuba: Filibustering and Cuban Exiles in the United
    States. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
May, Robert E. Manifest Destiny’s Underworld: Filibustering in Antebellum
    America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Merry, Robert W. A Country of Vast Designs: James K. Polk, the Mexican War
    and the Conquest of the American Continent. New York: Simon and Schus-
    ter, 2009.
Namias, June. White Captives: Gender and Ethnicity on the American Frontier.
    Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Perdue, Theda. “Mixed Blood” Indians: Racial Construction in the Early South.
    Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2005.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
342                                                                         chapter 12


             Peters, Virginia Pergman. Women of the Earth Lodges: Tribal Life on the Plains.
                 Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2000.
             Peterson, Dawn. Indians in the Family: Adoption and the Politics of Antebellum
                 Expansion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017.
             Richter, Daniel K. Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of Early
                 America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009.
             Wilkins, David E. Hollow Justice: A History of Indigenous Claims in the United
                 States. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013.
             Yarbrough, Faye. Race and the Cherokee Nation: Sovereignty in the Nineteenth
                 Century. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
13
The Sectional Crisis

I. Introduction
Slavery’s western expansion created problems for the United States from         This mural, cre-
                                                                                ated more than
the very start. Battles emerged over the westward expansion of slavery and
                                                                                eighty years after
over the role of the federal government in protecting the interests of slave-   Brown’s death,
holders. Northern workers felt that slavery suppressed wages and stole          captures the vio-
                                                                                lence and religious
land that could have been used by poor white Americans to achieve eco-          fervor of the man
nomic independence. Southerners feared that without slavery’s expansion,        and his era. John
                                                                                Steuart Curry,
the abolitionist faction would come to dominate national politics and an        Tragic Prelude,
increasingly dense population of slaves would lead to bloody insurrection       1938–1940. Kan-
                                                                                sas State Capitol.
and race war. Constant resistance from enslaved men and women required
a strong pro-slavery government to maintain order. As the North gradu-
ally abolished human bondage, enslaved men and women headed north on
an underground railroad of hideaways and safe houses. Northerners and
southerners came to disagree sharply on the role of the federal ­government

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 4 4 chapt er 13


        in capturing and returning these freedom seekers. While northerners ap-
        pealed to their states’ rights to refuse capturing runaway slaves, white
        southerners demanded a national commitment to slavery. Enslaved labor-
        ers meanwhile remained vitally important to the nation’s economy, fueling
        not only the southern plantation economy but also providing raw materi-
        als for the industrial North. Differences over the fate of slavery remained
        at the heart of American politics, especially as the United States expanded.
        After decades of conflict, Americans north and south began to fear that the
        opposite section of the country had seized control of the government. By
        November 1860, an opponent of slavery’s expansion arose from within the
        Republican Party. During the secession crisis that followed, fears nearly a
        century in the making at last devolved into bloody war.


        II. Sectionalism in the Early Republic
        Slavery’s history stretched back to antiquity. Prior to the American Revo-
        lution, nearly everyone in the world accepted it as a natural part of life.1
        English colonies north and south relied on enslaved workers who grew
        tobacco, harvested indigo and sugar, and worked in ports. They gener-
        ated tremendous wealth for the British crown. That wealth and luxury
        fostered seemingly limitless opportunities and inspired seemingly bound-
        less imaginations. Enslaved workers also helped give rise to revolution-
        ary new ideals that in time became the ideological foundations of the
        sectional crisis. English political theorists, in particular, began to rethink
        natural-law justifications for slavery. They rejected the long-standing
        idea that slavery was a condition that naturally suited some people. A
        new transatlantic antislavery movement began to argue that freedom was
        the natural condition of humankind.2
            Revolutionaries seized onto these ideas to stunning effect in the late
        eighteenth century. In the United States, France, and Haiti, revolutionar-
        ies began the work of splintering the old order. Each revolution seemed
        to radicalize the next. Bolder and more expansive declarations of equality
        and freedom followed one after the other. Revolutionaries in the United
        States declared, “All men are created equal,” in the 1770s. French vision-
        aries issued the “Declaration of Rights and Man and Citizen” by 1789.
        But the most startling development came in 1803. A revolution led by the
        island’s rebellious slaves turned France’s most valuable sugar colony into
        an independent country administered by the formerly enslaved.
            The Haitian Revolution marked an early origin of the sectional crisis.
        It helped splinter the Atlantic basin into clear zones of freedom and un-

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  345




This map, published by the U.S. Coast Guard, shows the percentage of slaves in the population in each
county of the slave-holding states in 1860. The highest percentages lie along the Mississippi River, in the
“Black Belt” of Alabama, and in coastal South Carolina, all of which were centers of agricultural produc-
tion (cotton and rice) in the United States. E. Hergesheimer (cartographer) and Th. Leonhardt (engraver),
Map Showing the Distribution of the Slave Population of the Southern States of the United States Compiled
from the Census of 1860, c. 1861. Wikimedia.


freedom, shattering the long-standing assumption that African-descended
slaves could not also be rulers. Despite the clear limitations of the Ameri-
can Revolution in attacking slavery, the era marked a powerful break in
slavery’s history. Military service on behalf of both the English and the
American army freed thousands of slaves. Many others simply used the
turmoil of war to make their escape. As a result, free black communities
emerged—communities that would continually reignite the antislavery
struggle. For nearly a century, most white Americans were content to
compromise over the issue of slavery, but the constant agitation of black
Americans, both enslaved and free, kept the issue alive.3
    The national breakdown over slavery occurred over a long timeline
and across a broad geography. Debates over slavery in the American

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 4 6 chapt er 13


        West proved especially important. As the United States pressed west-
        ward, new questions arose as to whether those lands ought to be slave or
        free. The framers of the Constitution did a little, but not much, to help re-
        solve these early questions. Article VI of the 1787 Northwest Ordinance
        banned slavery north and west of the Ohio River.4 Many took it to mean
        that the founders intended for slavery to die out, as why else would they
        prohibit its spread across such a huge swath of territory?
            Debates over the framers’ intentions often led to confusion and bitter
        debate, but the actions of the new government left better clues as to what
        the new nation intended for slavery. Congress authorized the admission
        of Vermont (1791) and Kentucky (1792), with Vermont coming into the
        Union as a free state and Kentucky coming in as a slave state. Though
        Americans at the time made relatively little of the balancing act suggested
        by the admission of a slave state and a free state, the pattern became in-
        creasingly important. By 1820, preserving the balance of free states and
        slave states would be seen as an issue of national security.
            New pressures challenging the delicate balance again arose in the
        West. The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 more than doubled the size of
        the United States. Questions immediately arose as to whether these lands
        would be made slave or free. Complicating matters further was the rapid
        expansion of plantation slavery fueled by the invention of the cotton
        gin in 1793. Yet even with the booming cotton economy, many Ameri-
        cans, including Thomas Jefferson, believed that slavery was a temporary
        institution and would soon die out. Tensions rose with the Louisiana
        Purchase, but a truly sectional national debate remained mostly dormant.
            That debate, however, came quickly. Sectional differences tied to the
        expansion of plantation slavery in the West were especially important
        after 1803. The Ohio River Valley became an early fault line in the com-
        ing sectional struggle. Kentucky and Tennessee emerged as slave states,
        while free states Ohio, Indiana (1816), and Illinois (1818) gained admis-
        sion along the river’s northern banks. Borderland negotiations and ac-
        commodations along the Ohio River fostered a distinctive kind of white
        supremacy, as laws tried to keep blacks out of the West entirely. Ohio’s
        so-called Black Laws of 1803 foreshadowed the exclusionary cultures of
        Indiana, Illinois, and several subsequent states of the Old Northwest and
        later, the Far West.5 These laws often banned African American voting,
        denied black Americans access to public schools, and made it impossible
        for nonwhites to serve on juries and in local militias, among a host of
        other restrictions and obstacles.



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  347


    The Missouri Territory, by far the largest section of the Louisiana
Territory, marked a turning point in the sectional crisis. St. Louis, a bus-
tling Mississippi River town filled with powerful slave owners, loomed
large as an important trade headquarters for networks in the northern
Mississippi Valley and the Greater West. In 1817, eager to put questions
of whether this territory would be slave or free to rest, Congress opened
its debate over Missouri’s admission to the Union. Congressman James
Tallmadge of New York proposed laws that would gradually abolish
slavery in the new state. Southern states responded with unanimous out-
rage, and the nation shuddered at an undeniable sectional controversy.6
    Congress reached a “compromise” on Missouri’s admission, largely
through the work of Kentuckian Henry Clay. Maine would be admit-
ted to the Union as a free state. In exchange, Missouri would come into
the Union as a slave state. Legislators sought to prevent future conflicts
by making Missouri’s southern border at 36°30′ the new dividing line
between slavery and freedom in the Louisiana Purchase lands. South of
that line, running east from Missouri to the western edge of the Louisi-
ana Purchase lands (near the present-day Texas panhandle), slavery could
expand. North of it, encompassing what in 1820 was still “unorganized
territory,” there would be no slavery.7
    The Missouri Compromise marked a major turning point in Amer-
ica’s sectional crisis because it exposed to the public just how divisive
the slavery issue had grown. The debate filled newspapers, speeches, and
congressional records. Antislavery and pro-slavery positions from that
point forward repeatedly returned to points made during the Missouri
debates. Legislators battled for weeks over whether the Constitutional
framers intended slavery’s expansion, and these contests left deep scars.
Even seemingly simple and straightforward phrases like “all men are cre-
ated equal” were hotly contested all over again. Questions over the ex-
pansion of slavery remained open, but nearly all Americans concluded
that the Constitution protected slavery where it already existed.
    Southerners were not yet advancing arguments that said slavery was
a positive good, but they did insist during the Missouri Debate that the
framers supported slavery and wanted to see it expand. In Article I, Sec-
tion 2, for example, the Constitution enabled representation in the South
to be based on rules defining an enslaved person as three fifths of a voter,
meaning southern white men would be overrepresented in Congress. The
Constitution also stipulated that Congress could not interfere with the
slave trade before 1808 and enabled Congress to draft fugitive slave laws.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 4 8 chapt er 13


            Antislavery participants in the Missouri debate argued that the fram-
        ers never intended slavery to survive the Revolution and in fact hoped it
        would disappear through peaceful means. The framers of the Constitu-
        tion never used the word slave. Slaves were referred to as “persons held
        in service,” perhaps referring to English common law precedents that
        questioned the legitimacy of “property in man.” Antislavery activists
        also pointed out that while Congress could not pass a law limiting the
        slave trade before 1808, the framers had also recognized the flip side of
        the debate and had thus opened the door to legislating the slave trade’s
        end once the deadline arrived. Language in the Tenth Amendment, they
        claimed, also said slavery could be banned in the territories. Finally, they
        pointed to the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment, which said
        that property could be seized through appropriate legislation.8 The bruis-
        ing Missouri debates ultimately transcended arguments about the Con-
        stitution. They became an all-encompassing referendum on the American
        past, present, and future.
            Despite the furor, the Missouri crisis did not yet inspire hardened
        defenses of either slave or free labor as positive good. Those would come
        in the coming decades. In the meantime, the uneasy consensus forged by
        the Missouri debate managed to bring a measure of calm.
            The Missouri debate had also deeply troubled the nation’s African
        Americans and Native Americans. By the time of the Missouri Compro-
        mise debate, both groups saw that whites never intended them to be citi-
        zens of the United States. In fact, the debates over Missouri’s admission
        had offered the first sustained debate on the question of black citizen-
        ship, as Missouri’s state constitution wanted to impose a hard ban on
        any future black migrants. Legislators ultimately agreed that this hard
        ban violated the U.S. Constitution but reaffirmed Missouri’s ability to
        deny citizenship to African Americans. Americans by 1820 had endured
        a broad challenge, not only to their cherished ideals but also more funda-
        mentally to their conceptions of self.


        III. The Crisis Joined
        Missouri’s admission to the Union in 1821 exposed deep fault lines in
        American society. But the compromise created a new sectional consensus
        that most white Americans, at least, hoped would ensure a lasting peace.
        Through sustained debates and arguments, white Americans agreed that
        the Constitution could do little about slavery where it already existed and



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  349


that slavery, with the State of Missouri as the key exception, would never
expand north of the 36°30′ line.
    Once again westward expansion challenged this consensus, and this
time the results proved even more damaging. Tellingly, enslaved south-
erners were among the first to signal their discontent. A rebellion led
by Denmark Vesey in 1822 threatened lives and property throughout
the Carolinas. The nation’s religious leaders also expressed a rising dis-
content with the new status quo.9 The Second Great Awakening further
sharpened political differences by promoting schisms within the major
Protestant churches, schisms that also became increasingly sectional in
nature. Between 1820 and 1846, sectionalism drew on new political par-
ties, new religious organizations, and new reform movements.
    As politics grew more democratic, leaders attacked old inequalities
of wealth and power, but in doing so many pandered to a unity under
white supremacy. Slavery briefly receded from the nation’s attention in
the early 1820s, but that would change quickly. By the last half of the de-
cade, slavery was back, and this time it appeared even more threatening.
    Inspired by the social change of Jacksonian democracy, white men
regardless of status would gain not only land and jobs but also the right
to vote, the right to serve on juries, the right to attend public schools, and
the right to serve in the militia and armed forces. In this post-Missouri
context, leaders arose to push the country’s new expansionist desires in
aggressive new directions. As they did so, however, the sectional crisis
again deepened.
    The Democratic Party initially seemed to offer a compelling answer
to the problems of sectionalism by promising benefits to white working
men of the North, South, and West, while also uniting rural, small-town,
and urban residents. Indeed, huge numbers of western, southern, and
northern workingmen rallied behind Andrew Jackson during the 1828
presidential election. The Democratic Party tried to avoid the issue of
slavery and instead sought to unite Americans around shared commit-
ments to white supremacy and desires to expand the nation.
    Democrats were not without their critics. Northerners seen as espe-
cially friendly to the South had become known as “Doughfaces” during
the Missouri debates, and as the 1830s wore on, more and more Dough-
faced Democrats became vulnerable to the charge that they served the
southern slave oligarchs better than they served their own northern com-
munities. Whites discontented with the direction of the country used the
slur and other critiques to help chip away at Democratic Party ­majorities.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 5 0 chapt er 13


        The accusation that northern Democrats were lapdogs for southern slave-
        holders had real power.10
            The Whigs offered an organized major-party challenge to the Demo-
        crats. Whig strongholds often mirrored the patterns of westward migra-
        tions out of New England. Whigs drew from an odd coalition of wealthy
        merchants, middle- and upper-class farmers, planters in the Upland
        South, and settlers in the Great Lakes. Because of this motley coalition,
        the party struggled to bring a cohesive message to voters in the 1830s.
        Their strongest support came from places like Ohio’s Western Reserve,
        the rural and Protestant-dominated areas of Michigan, and similar parts
        of Protestant and small-town Illinois, particularly the fast-growing towns
        and cities of the state’s northern half.11
            Whig leaders stressed Protestant culture and federal-sponsored inter-
        nal improvements and courted the support of a variety of reform move-
        ments, including temperance, nativism, and even antislavery, though few
        Whigs believed in racial equality. These positions attracted a wide range
        of figures, including a young convert to politics named Abraham Lincoln.
        Lincoln admired Whig leader Henry Clay of Kentucky, and by the early
        1830s, Lincoln certainly fit the image of a developing Whig. A veteran of
        the Black Hawk War, Lincoln had relocated to New Salem, Illinois, where
        he worked a variety of odd jobs, living a life of thrift, self-discipline, and
        sobriety as he educated himself in preparation for a professional life in
        law and politics.
            The Whig Party blamed Democrats for defending slavery at the ex-
        pense of the American people, but antislavery was never a core compo-
        nent of the Whig platform. Several abolitionists grew so disgusted with
        the Whigs that they formed their own party, a true antislavery party.
        Activists in Warsaw, New York, organized the antislavery Liberty Party
        in 1839. Liberty leaders demanded the end of slavery in the District of
        Columbia, the end of the interstate slave trade, and the prohibition of
        slavery’s expansion into the West. But the Liberty Party also shunned
        women’s participation in the movement and distanced themselves from
        visions of true racial egalitarianism. Few Americans voted for the party.
        The Democrats and Whigs continued to dominate American politics.
            Democrats and Whigs fostered a moment of relative calm on the
        slavery debate, partially aided by gag rules prohibiting discussion of an-
        tislavery petitions. Arkansas (1836) and Michigan (1837) became the
        newest states admitted to the Union, with Arkansas coming in as a slave
        state, and Michigan coming in as a free state. Michigan gained admis-



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  351


sion through provisions established in the Northwest Ordinance, while
Arkansas came in under the Missouri Compromise. Since its lands were
below the line at 36°30′, the admission of Arkansas did not threaten
the Missouri consensus. The balancing act between slavery and freedom
continued.
    Events in Texas would shatter the balance. Independent Texas soon
gained recognition from a supportive Andrew Jackson administration in
1837. But Jackson’s successor, President Martin Van Buren, also a Dem-
ocrat, soon had reasons to worry about the Republic of Texas. Texas
struggled with ongoing conflicts with Mexico and Indian raids from
the powerful Comanche. The 1844 democratic presidential candidate
James K. Polk sought to bridge the sectional divide by promising new
lands to whites north and south. Polk cited the annexation of Texas and
the Oregon Territory as campaign cornerstones.12 Yet as Polk champi-
oned the acquisition of these vast new lands, northern Democrats grew
annoyed by their southern colleagues, especially when it came to Texas.
    For many observers, the debates over Texas statehood illustrated that
the federal government was clearly pro-slavery. Texas president Sam
Houston managed to secure a deal with Polk and gained admission to the
Union for Texas in 1845. Antislavery northerners also worried about the
admission of Florida, which entered the Union as a slave state in 1845.
The year 1845 became a pivotal year in the memory of antislavery lead-
ers. As Americans embraced calls to pursue their manifest destiny, anti-
slavery voices looked at developments in Florida and Texas as signs that
the sectional crisis had taken an ominous and perhaps irredeemable turn.
    The 1840s opened with a number of disturbing developments for an-
tislavery leaders. The 1842 Supreme Court case Prigg v. Pennsylvania
ruled that the federal government’s Fugitive Slave Act trumped Pennsyl-
vania’s personal liberty law.13 Antislavery activists believed that the fed-
eral government only served southern slaveholders and were trouncing
the states’ rights of the North. A number of northern states reacted by
passing new personal liberty laws in protest in 1843.
    The rising controversy over the status of fugitive slaves swelled partly
through the influence of escaped former slaves, including Frederick Doug-
lass. Douglass’s entrance into northern politics marked an important new
development in the nation’s coming sectional crisis. Born into slavery in
1818 at Talbot County, Maryland, Douglass grew up, like many enslaved
people, barely having known his own mother or date of birth. And yet
because of a range of unique privileges afforded him by the circumstances



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 5 2 chapt er 13


        of his upbringing, as well as his own genius and determination, Douglass
        managed to learn how to read and write. He used these skills to escape
        from slavery in 1837, when he was just nineteen. By 1845, Douglass
        put the finishing touches on his autobiography, Narrative of the Life of
        Frederick Douglass.14 The book launched his lifelong career as an ad-
        vocate for the enslaved and helped further raise the visibility of black
        politics. Other former slaves, including Sojourner Truth, joined Douglass
        in rousing support for antislavery, as did free black Americans like Maria
        Stewart, James McCune Smith, Martin Delaney, and numerous others.15
        But black activists did more than deliver speeches. They also attacked
        fugitive slave laws by helping thousands to escape. The incredible career
        of Harriet Tubman is one of the more dramatic examples. But the forces
        of slavery had powerful allies at every level of government.
            The year 1846 signaled new reversals to the antislavery cause and the
        beginnings of a dark new era in American politics. President Polk and his
        Democratic allies were eager to see western lands brought into the Union
        and were especially anxious to see the borders of the nation extended to
        the shores of the Pacific Ocean. Critics of the administration blasted these
        efforts as little more than land grabs on behalf of slaveholders. Events
        in early 1846 seemed to justify antislavery complaints. Since Mexico
        had never recognized independent Texas, it continued to lay claim to its
        lands, even after the United States admitted it to the Union. In January
        1846, Polk ordered troops to Texas to enforce claims stemming from its
        border dispute along the Rio Grande. Polk asked for war on May 11,
        1846, and by September 1847, the United States had invaded Mexico
        City. Whigs, like Abraham Lincoln, found their protests sidelined, but
        antislavery voices were becoming more vocal and more powerful.
            After 1846, the sectional crisis raged throughout North America. De-
        bates swirled over whether the new lands would be slave or free. The
        South began defending slavery as a positive good. At the same time, Con-
        gressman David Wilmot submitted his Wilmot Proviso late in 1846, ban-
        ning the expansion of slavery into the territories won from Mexico. The
        proviso gained widespread northern support and even passed the House
        with bipartisan support, but it failed in the Senate.


        IV. Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men
        The conclusion of the Mexican War led to the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe
        Hidalgo. The treaty infuriated antislavery leaders in the United States. The
        spoils of war were impressive, but it was clear they would help expand

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  353


slavery. Antislavery activists, who already judged the Mexican War a
slaveholders’ plot, vowed that no new territories would be opened to slav-
ery. But knowing that the Liberty Party was also not likely to provide a
home to many moderate voters, leaders fostered a new and more competi-
tive party, which they called the Free Soil Party. Antislavery leaders had
thought that their vision of a federal government divorced from slavery
might be represented by the major parties in that year’s presidential elec-
tion, but both the Whigs and the Democrats nominated pro-slavery south-
erners. Left unrepresented, antislavery Free Soil leaders swung into action.
    Demanding an alternative to the pro-slavery status quo, Free Soil
leaders assembled so-called Conscience Whigs. The new coalition called
for a national convention in August 1848 at Buffalo, New York. A num-
ber of ex-Democrats committed to the party right away, including an
important group of New Yorkers loyal to Martin Van Buren. The Free
Soil Party’s platform bridged the eastern and western leadership together
and called for an end to slavery in Washington, D.C., and a halt on slav-
ery’s expansion in the territories.16 The Free Soil movement hardly made
a dent in the 1848 presidential election, but it drew more than four times




Questions about the balance of free and slave states in the Union became even more fierce after the United
States acquired these territories from Mexico by the 1848 in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Map of the
Mexican Cession, 2008. Wikimedia. Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 5 4 chapt er 13


        the popular vote won by the Liberty Party earlier. It was a promising
        start. In 1848, Free Soil leaders claimed just 10 percent of the popular
        vote but won over a dozen House seats and even managed to win one
        Senate seat in Ohio, which went to Salmon P. Chase.17 In Congress, Free
        Soil members had enough votes to swing power to either the Whigs or
        the Democrats.
            The admission of Wisconsin as a free state in May 1848 helped cool
        tensions after the Texas and Florida admissions. Meanwhile, news from a
        number of failed European revolutions alarmed American reformers, but
        as exiled radicals filtered into the United States, a strengthening women’s
        rights movement also flexed its muscle at Seneca Falls, New York. Led
        by figures such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott, women
        with deep ties to the abolitionist cause, it represented the first of such
        meetings ever held in U.S. history.18 Frederick Douglass also appeared
        at the convention and took part in the proceedings, where participants
        debated the Declaration of Sentiments, Grievances, and Resolutions.19
        By August 1848, it seemed plausible that the Free Soil Movement might
        tap into these reforms and build a broader coalition. In some ways that
        is precisely what it did. But come November, the spirit of reform failed to
        yield much at the polls. Whig candidate Zachary Taylor bested Democrat
        Lewis Cass of Michigan.
            The upheavals of 1848 came to a quick end. Taylor remained in office
        only a brief time until his unexpected death from a stomach ailment in
        1850. During Taylor’s brief time in office, the fruits of the Mexican War
        began to spoil. While Taylor was alive, his administration struggled to
        find a good remedy. Increased clamoring for the admission of California,
        New Mexico, and Utah pushed the country closer to the edge. Gold had
        been discovered in California, and as thousands continued to pour onto
        the West Coast and through the trans-Mississippi West, the admission
        of new states loomed. In Utah, Mormons were also making claims to
        an independent state they called Deseret. By 1850, California wanted
        admission as a free state. With so many competing dynamics under way,
        and with the president dead and replaced by Whig Millard Fillmore, the
        1850s were off to a troubling start.
            Congressional leaders like Henry Clay and newer legislators like Ste-
        phen A. Douglas of Illinois were asked to broker a compromise, but this
        time it was clear no compromise could bridge all the diverging interests at
        play in the country. Clay eventually left Washington disheartened by af-
        fairs. It fell to young Stephen Douglas, then, to shepherd the bills through
        Congress, which he in fact did. Legislators rallied behind the Compro-

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  355




Henry Clay (“The Great Compromiser”) addresses the U.S. Senate during the debates over the Compromise
of 1850. The print shows a number of incendiary personalities, like John C. Calhoun, whose increasingly
sectional beliefs were pacified for a time by the Compromise. P. F. Rothermel (artist), c. 1855. Wikimedia.


mise of 1850, an assemblage of bills passed late in 1850, which managed
to keep the promises of the Missouri Compromise alive.
    The Compromise of 1850 tried to offer something to everyone, but in
the end it only worsened the sectional crisis. For southerners, the pack-
age offered a tough new fugitive slave law that empowered the federal
government to deputize regular citizens in arresting runaways. The New
Mexico Territory and the Utah Territory would be allowed to determine
their own fates as slave or free states based on popular sovereignty. The
compromise also allowed territories to submit suits directly to the Su-
preme Court over the status of fugitive slaves within their bounds.
    The admission of California as the newest free state in the Union
cheered many northerners, but even the admission of a vast new state full
of resources and rich agricultural lands was not enough. In addition to
California, northerners also gained a ban on the slave trade in Washing-
ton, D.C., but not the full emancipation abolitionists had long ­advocated.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 5 6 chapt er 13


        Texas, which had already come into the Union as a slave state, was asked
        to give some of its land to New Mexico in return for the federal govern-
        ment absorbing some of the former republic’s debt. But the compromise
        debates soon grew ugly.
            After the Compromise of 1850, antislavery critics became increas-
        ingly certain that slaveholders had co-opted the federal government, and
        that a southern Slave Power secretly held sway in Washington, where
        it hoped to make slavery a national institution. These northern com-
        plaints pointed back to how the three-fifths compromise of the Constitu-
        tion gave southerners proportionally more representatives in Congress.
        In the 1850s, antislavery leaders increasingly argued that Washington
        worked on behalf of slaveholders while ignoring the interests of white
        working men.
            None of the individual measures in the Compromise of 1850 proved
        more troubling to antislavery Americans than the Fugitive Slave Act. In
        a clear bid to extend slavery’s influence throughout the country, the act
        created special federal commissioners to determine the fate of alleged
        fugitives without benefit of a jury trial or even court testimony. Under its
        provisions, local authorities in the North could not interfere with the cap-
        ture of fugitives. Northern citizens, moreover, had to assist in the arrest
        of fugitive slaves when called upon by federal agents. The Fugitive Slave
        Act created the foundation for a massive expansion of federal power,
        including an alarming increase in the nation’s policing powers. Many
        northerners were also troubled by the way the bill undermined local and
        state laws. The law itself fostered corruption and the enslavement of free
        black northerners. The federal commissioners who heard these cases were
        paid $10 if they determined that the defendant was a slave and only $5 if
        they determined he or she was free.20 Many black northerners responded
        to the new law by heading farther north to Canada.
            The 1852 presidential election gave the Whigs their most stunning
        defeat and effectively ended their existence as a national political party.
        Whigs captured just 42 of the 254 electoral votes needed to win. With
        the Compromise of 1850 and plenty of new lands, peaceful consensus
        seemed to be on the horizon. Antislavery feelings continued to run deep,
        however, and their depth revealed that with a Democratic Party misstep, a
        coalition united against the Democrats might yet emerge and bring them
        to defeat. One measure of the popularity of antislavery ideas came in
        1852 when Harriet Beecher Stowe published her best-selling antislavery
        novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin. Sales for Uncle Tom’s Cabin were astronomi-



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  357




Uncle Tom’s Cabin intensified an already hot debate over slavery throughout the United States. The book
revolves around Eliza (the woman holding the young boy) and Tom (standing with his wife, Chloe), each of
whom takes a very different path: Eliza escapes slavery using her own two feet, but Tom endures his chains
only to die by the whip of a brutish master. The horrific violence that both endured melted the hearts of
many Northerners and pressed some to join in the fight against slavery. Full-page illustration by Hammatt
Billings for Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 1852. Wikimedia.



cal, eclipsed only by sales of the Bible.21 The book became a sensation
and helped move antislavery into everyday conversation for many north-
erners. Despite the powerful antislavery message, Stowe’s book also re-
inforced many racist stereotypes. Even abolitionists struggled with the
deeply ingrained racism that plagued American society. While the major
success of Uncle Tom’s Cabin bolstered the abolitionist cause, the terms
outlined by the Compromise of 1850 appeared strong enough to keep
the peace.
    Democrats by 1853 were badly splintered along sectional lines over
slavery, but they also had reasons to act with confidence. Voters had
returned them to office in 1852 following the bitter fights over the Com-
promise of 1850. Emboldened, Illinois senator Stephen A. Douglas in-
troduced a set of additional amendments to a bill drafted in late 1853 to
help organize the Nebraska Territory, the last of the Louisiana Purchase
lands. In 1853, the Nebraska Territory was huge, extending from the
northern end of Texas to the Canadian border. Altogether, it ­encompassed



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 5 8 chapt er 13


        ­ resent-day Nebraska, Wyoming, South Dakota, North Dakota, Colo-
        p
        rado, and Montana. Douglas’s efforts to amend and introduce the bill in
        1854 opened dynamics that would break the Democratic Party in two
        and, in the process, rip the country apart.
             Douglas proposed a bold plan in 1854 to cut off a large southern
        chunk of Nebraska and create it separately as the Kansas Territory.
        Douglas had a number of goals in mind. The expansionist Democrat
        from Illinois wanted to organize the territory to facilitate the completion
        of a national railroad that would flow through Chicago. But before he
        had even finished introducing the bill, opposition had already mobilized.
        Salmon P. Chase drafted a response in northern newspapers that exposed
        the Kansas-Nebraska Bill as a measure to overturn the Missouri Com-
        promise and open western lands for slavery. Kansas-Nebraska protests
        emerged in 1854 throughout the North, with key meetings in Wisconsin
        and Michigan. Kansas would become slave or free depending on the re-
        sult of local elections, elections that would be greatly influenced by mi-
        grants flooding to the state to either protect or stop the spread of slavery.
             Ordinary Americans in the North increasingly resisted what they be-
        lieved to be a pro-slavery federal government on their own terms. The
        rescues and arrests of fugitive slaves Anthony Burns in Boston and Joshua
        Glover in Milwaukee, for example, both signaled the rising vehemence
        of resistance to the nation’s 1850 fugitive slave law. The case of Anthony
        Burns illustrates how the Fugitive Slave Law radicalized many northern-
        ers. On May 24, 1854, twenty-year-old Burns, a preacher who worked in
        a Boston clothing shop, was clubbed and dragged to jail. One year ear-
        lier, Burns had escaped slavery in Virginia, and a group of slave catchers
        had come to return him to Richmond. Word of Burns’s capture spread
        rapidly through Boston, and a mob gathered outside the courthouse de-
        manding Burns’s release. Two days after the arrest, the crowd stormed
        the courthouse and shot a deputy U.S. Marshal to death. News reached
        Washington, and the federal government sent soldiers. Boston was placed
        under martial law. Federal troops lined the streets of Boston as Burns was
        marched to a ship, where he was sent back to slavery in Virginia. After
        spending over $40,000, the U.S. government had successfully reenslaved
        Anthony Burns.22 A short time later, Burns was redeemed by abolition-
        ists who paid $1,300 to return him to freedom, but the outrage among
        Bostonians only grew. And Anthony Burns was only one of hundreds of
        highly publicized episodes of the federal government imposing the Fugi-
        tive Slave Law on rebellious northern populations. In the words of Amos



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  359




                                                     Anthony Burns, the fugitive slave, appears in a
                                                     portrait at the center of this 1855. Burns’s arrest
                                                     and trial, possible because of the 1850 Fugitive
                                                     Slave Act, became a rallying cry. As a symbol of
                                                     the injustice of the slave system, Burns’s treat-
                                                     ment spurred riots and protests by abolitionists
                                                     and citizens of Boston in the spring of 1854.
                                                     John Andrews (engraver), Anthony Burns, c.
                                                     1855. Library of Congress.




Adams Lawrence, “We went to bed one night old-fashioned, conserva-
tive, compromise Union Whigs & woke up stark mad Abolitionists.”23
    As northerners radicalized, organizations like the New England Emi-
grant Aid Company provided guns and other goods for pioneers willing
to go to Kansas and establish the territory as antislavery through popular
sovereignty. On all sides of the slavery issue, politics became increasingly
militarized.
    The year 1855 nearly derailed the northern antislavery coalition. A resur-
gent anti-immigrant movement briefly took advantage of the Whig collapse
and nearly stole the energy of the anti-administration forces by channel-
ing its frustrations into fights against the large number of mostly Catholic
German and Irish immigrants in American cities. Calling themselves Know-
Nothings, on account of their tendency to pretend ignorance when asked
about their activities, the Know-Nothing or American Party made impres-
sive gains in 1854 and 1855, particularly in New England and the Middle
Atlantic. But the anti-immigrant movement simply could not capture the
nation’s attention in ways the antislavery movement already had.24
    The antislavery political movements that started in 1854 coalesced
with the formation of a new political party. Harking back to the ­founding



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 6 0 chapt er 13


                    fathers, its organizers named it the Republican Party. Republicans moved
                    forward into a highly charged summer.
                         Following an explosive speech before Congress on May 19–20, Sena-
                    tor Charles Sumner of Massachusetts was violently beaten with a cane
                    by Representative Preston Brooks of South Carolina on the floor of the
                    Senate chamber. Among other accusations, Sumner accused Senator An-
                    drew Butler of South Carolina, Brooks’s cousin, of defending slavery so
                    he could have sexual access to black women.25 Brooks felt that he had to
                    defend his relative’s honor and nearly killed Sumner as a result.
                         The violence in Washington pales before the many murders occurring
                    in Kansas.26 Pro-slavery raiders attacked Lawrence, Kansas. Radical abo-
                    litionist John Brown retaliated, murdering several pro-slavery Kansans in
                    retribution. As all of this played out, the House failed to expel Brooks.
                    Brooks resigned his seat anyway, only to be reelected by his constituents
                    later in the year. He received new canes emblazoned with the words “Hit
                    him again!”27
                         With sectional tensions at a breaking point, both parties readied for
                    the coming presidential election. In June 1856, the newly named Repub-
                    lican Party held its nominating convention at Philadelphia and selected
                    Californian John Charles Frémont. Frémont’s antislavery credentials may
                    not have pleased many abolitionists, but his dynamic and talented wife,
                    Jessie Benton Frémont, appealed to more radical members of the coali-
The Caning of
Charles Sumner,
                    tion. The Kansas-Nebraska debate, the organization of the Republican
1856. Wikimedia.    Party, and the 1856 presidential campaign all energized a new genera-




              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  361


tion of political leaders, including Abraham Lincoln. Beginning with his
speech at Peoria, Illinois, in 1854, Lincoln carved out a message that
encapsulated better than anyone else the main ideas and visions of the
Republican Party.28 Lincoln himself was slow to join the coalition, yet
by the summer of 1856, Lincoln had fully committed to the Frémont
campaign.
    Frémont lost, but Republicans celebrated that he won eleven of the
sixteen free states. This showing, they urged, was truly impressive for
any party making its first run at the presidency. Yet northern Democrats
in crucial swing states remained unmoved by the Republican Party’s ap-
peals. Ulysses S. Grant of Missouri, for example, worried that Frémont
and Republicans signaled trouble for the Union itself. Grant voted for the
Democratic candidate, James Buchanan, believing a Republican victory
might bring about disunion. In abolitionist and especially black Ameri-
can circles, Frémont’s defeat was more than a disappointment. Believ-
ing their fate had been sealed as permanent noncitizens, some African
Americans would consider foreign emigration and colonization. Others
began to explore the option of more radical and direct action against the
Slave Power.


V. From Sectional Crisis to National Crisis
White antislavery leaders hailed Frémont’s defeat as a “glorious” one and
looked ahead to the party’s future successes. For those still in slavery or
hoping to see loved ones freed, the news was of course much harder to
take. The Republican Party had promised the rise of an antislavery coali-
tion, but voters rebuked it. The lessons seemed clear enough.
    Kansas loomed large over the 1856 election, darkening the national
mood. The story of voter fraud in Kansas had begun years before in
1854, when nearby Missourians first started crossing the border to tam-
per with the Kansas elections. Noting this, critics at the time attacked
the Pierce administration for not living up to the ideals of popular sov-
ereignty by ensuring fair elections. From there, the crisis only deepened.
Kansas voted to come into the Union as a free state, but the federal gov-
ernment refused to recognize their votes and instead recognized a sham
pro-slavery legislature.
    The sectional crisis had at last become a national crisis. “Bleeding
Kansas” was the first place to demonstrate that the sectional crisis could
easily be, and in fact already was, exploding into a full-blown national



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 6 2 chapt er 13


                        crisis. As the national mood grew increasingly grim, Kansas attracted
                        militants representing the extreme sides of the slavery debate.
                            In the days after the 1856 presidential election, Buchanan made his
                        plans for his time in office clear. He talked with Chief Justice Roger Taney
                        on inauguration day about a court decision he hoped to see handled dur-
                        ing his time in office. Indeed, not long after the inauguration, the Supreme
                        Court handed down a decision that would come to define Buchanan’s
                        presidency. The Dred Scott decision, Scott v. Sandford, ruled that black
                        Americans could not be citizens of the United States.29 This gave the Bu-
                        chanan administration and its southern allies a direct repudiation of the
                        Missouri Compromise. The court ruled that Scott, a Missouri slave, had
                        no right to sue in United States courts. The Dred Scott decision signaled
                        that the federal government was now fully committed to extending slav-
                        ery as far and as wide as it might want.
                            The Dred Scott decision seemed to settle the sectional crisis by mak-
                        ing slavery fully national, but in reality it just exacerbated sectional ten-
                        sions further. In 1857, Buchanan sent U.S. military forces to Utah, hoping
                        to subdue Utah’s Mormon communities. This action, however, led to re-




Dred Scott’s Supreme Court case made
clear that the federal government was
no longer able or willing to ignore the
issue of slavery. More than that, all black
Americans, Justice Taney declared, could
never be citizens of the United States.
Though seemingly a disastrous decision
for abolitionists, this controversial ruling
actually increased the ranks of the abo-
litionist movement. Photograph of Dred
Scott, 1857. Wikimedia.



                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  363


newed charges, many of them leveled from within his own party, that
the administration was abusing its powers. Far more important than the
Utah invasion, however, were the ongoing events in Kansas. It was Kan-
sas that at last proved to many northerners that the sectional crisis would
not go away unless slavery also went away.
    The Illinois Senate race in 1858 put the scope of the sectional cri-
sis on full display. Republican candidate Abraham Lincoln challenged
the greatly influential Democrat Stephen Douglas. Pandering to appeals
to white supremacy, Douglas hammered the Republican opposition as
a “Black Republican” party bent on racial equality.30 The Republicans,
including Lincoln, were thrown on the defensive. Democrats hung on as
best they could, but the Republicans won the House of Representatives
and picked up seats in the Senate. Lincoln actually lost his contest with
Stephen Douglas but in the process firmly established himself as a leading
national Republican. After the 1858 elections, all eyes turned to 1860.
Given the Republican Party’s successes since 1854, it was expected that
the 1860 presidential election might produce the nation’s first antislavery
president.
    In the troubled decades since the Missouri Compromise, the nation
slowly tore itself apart. Congressmen clubbed each other nearly to death
on the floor of Congress, and by the middle of the 1850s Americans
were already at war on the Kansas and Missouri plains. Across the coun-
try, cities and towns were in various stages of revolt against federal au-
thority. Fighting spread even farther against Indians in the Far West and
against Mormons in Utah. The nation’s militants anticipated a coming
breakdown and worked to exploit it. John Brown, fresh from his actions
in Kansas, moved east and planned more violence. Assembling a team
from across the West, including black radicals from Oberlin, Ohio, and
throughout communities in western Canada, Brown hatched a plan to
attack Harper’s Ferry, a federal weapons arsenal in Virginia (now West
Virginia). He would use the weapons to lead a slave revolt. Brown ap-
proached Frederick Douglass, though Douglass refused to join.
    Brown’s raid embarked on October 16. By October 18, a command
under Robert E. Lee had crushed the revolt. Many of Brown’s men,
including his own sons, were killed, but Brown himself lived and was
imprisoned. Brown prophesied while in prison that the nation’s crimes
would only be purged with blood. He went to the gallows in December
1859. Northerners made a stunning display of sympathy on the day of
his execution. Southerners took their reactions to mean that the coming



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 6 4 chapt er 13




The execution of John Brown made him
a martyr in abolitionist circles and a
confirmed traitor in Southern crowds.
Both of these images continued to pervade
public memory after the Civil War, but
in the North especially (where so many
soldiers had died to help end slavery) his
name was admired. Over two decades
after Brown’s death, Thomas Hovenden
portrayed Brown as a saint. As he is led
to his execution for attempting to destroy
slavery, Brown poignantly leans over a
rail to kiss a black baby. Thomas Hoven-
den, The Last Moments of John Brown, c.
1882–1884. Wikimedia.



                      1860 election would be, in many ways, a referendum on secession and
                      disunion.
                          Republicans wanted little to do with Brown and instead tried to
                      portray themselves as moderates opposed to both abolitionists and pro-
                      slavery expansionists. In this climate, the parties opened their contest for
                      the 1860 presidential election. The Democratic Party fared poorly as its
                      southern delegates bolted its national convention at Charleston and ran
                      their own candidate, Vice President John C. Breckenridge of Kentucky.
                      Hoping to field a candidate who might nonetheless manage to bridge the
                      broken party’s factions, the Democrats decided to meet again at Balti-
                      more and nominated Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois.
                          The Republicans, meanwhile, held their boisterous convention in
                      Chicago. The Republican platform made the party’s antislavery com-
                      mitments clear, also making wide promises to its white constituents,
                      particularly westerners, with the promise of new land, transcontinental
                      railroads, and broad support of public schools.31 Abraham Lincoln, a
                      candidate few outside Illinois truly expected to win, nonetheless proved
                      far less polarizing than the other names on the ballot. Lincoln won the



               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  365




In this political cartoon, Abraham Lincoln uncomfortably straddles a rail supported by a black man and
Horace Greeley (editor of the New York Tribune). The wooden board is a dual reference to the antislavery
plank of the 1860 Republican platform—which Lincoln seemed to uneasily defend—and Lincoln’s back-
woods origins. Louis Maurer, The Rail Candidate, Currier & Ives, c. 1860. Library of Congress.


nomination, and with the Democrats in disarray, Republicans knew their
candidate Lincoln had a good chance of winning.
    Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 contest on November 6, gaining just
40 percent of the popular vote and not a single southern vote in the
Electoral College. Within days, southern states were organizing secession
conventions. John J. Crittenden of Kentucky proposed a series of com-
promises, but a clear pro-southern bias meant they had little chance of
gaining Republican acceptance. Crittenden’s plan promised renewed en-
forcement of the Fugitive Slave Law and offered a plan to keep slavery in
the nation’s capital.32 Republicans by late 1860 knew that the voters who
had just placed them in power did not want them to cave on these points,
and southern states proceeded with their plans to leave the Union. On
December 20, South Carolina voted to secede and issued its ­Declaration



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 6 6 chapt er 13


        of the Immediate Causes.33 The declaration highlighted failure of the fed-
        eral government to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act over competing per-
        sonal liberty laws in northern states. After the war many southerners
        claimed that secession was primarily motivated by a concern to preserve
        states’ rights, but the primary complaint of the very first ordinance of
        secession listed the federal government’s failure to exert its authority over
        the northern states.
            The year 1861, then, saw the culmination of the secession crisis.
        Before he left for Washington, Lincoln told those who had gathered in
        Springfield to wish him well and that he faced a “task greater than Wash-
        ington’s” in the years to come. Southerners were also learning the chal-
        lenges of forming a new nation. The seceded states grappled with internal
        divisions right away, as states with slaveholders sometimes did not sup-
        port the newly seceded states. In January, for example, Delaware rejected
        secession. But states in the Lower South adopted a different course. The
        state of Mississippi seceded. Later in the month, the states of Florida, Al-
        abama, Georgia, and Louisiana also all left the Union. By early February,
        Texas had also joined the newly seceded states. In February, southerners
        drafted a constitution protecting slavery and named Jefferson Davis of
        Mississippi their president. Weeks after Abraham Lincoln’s inauguration,
        rebels in the newly formed Confederate States of America opened fire on
        Fort Sumter in South Carolina. Within days, Abraham Lincoln would
        demand seventy-five thousand volunteers from the North to crush the
        rebellion. The American Civil War had begun.


        VI. Conclusion
        Slavery had long divided the politics of the United States. In time, these
        divisions became both sectional and irreconcilable. The first and most
        ominous sign of a coming sectional storm occurred over debates sur-
        rounding the admission of the state of Missouri in 1821. As westward
        expansion continued, these fault lines grew even more ominous, particu-
        larly as the United States managed to seize even more lands from its war
        with Mexico. The country seemed to teeter ever closer to a full-throated
        endorsement of slavery. But an antislavery coalition arose in the middle
        1850s calling itself the Republican Party. Eager to cordon off slavery and
        confine it to where it already existed, the Republicans won the presiden-
        tial election of 1860 and threw the nation on the path to war.
            Throughout this period, the mainstream of the antislavery movement
        remained committed to a peaceful resolution of the slavery issue through

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  367


efforts understood to foster the “ultimate extinction” of slavery in due
time. But as the secession crisis revealed, the South could not tolerate a
federal government working against the interests of slavery’s expansion
and decided to take a gamble on war with the United States. Secession, in
the end, raised the possibility of emancipation through war, a possibility
most Republicans knew, of course, had always been an option, but one
they nonetheless hoped would never be necessary. By 1861 all bets were
off, and the fate of slavery, and of the nation, depended on war.


VII. Reference Material
This chapter was edited by Jesse Gant, with content contributions by Jeffrey Bain-
Conkin, Matthew A. Byron, Christopher Childers, Jesse Gant, Christopher Null,
Ryan Poe, Michael Robinson, Nicholas Wood, Michael Woods, and Ben Wright.
    Recommended citation: Jeffrey Bain-Conkin et al., “The Sectional Crisis,”
Jesse Gant, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright (Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

N o t e s t o C h a p t e r 13
    1. David Brion Davis, The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1966).
    2. David Brion Davis, The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution,
1770–1823 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 164–212.
    3. See “Black Founders: The Free Black Community in the Early Republic,”
digital exhibit, Library Company of Philadelphia. http://​www​.librarycompany​
.org/​blackfounders/, accessed May 8, 2018.
    4. Northwest Ordinance, July 13, 1787; Charles C. Tansill, ed., Documents
Illustrative of the Formation of the Union of the American States (Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1927), House Document No. 398. http://​
avalon​.law​.yale​.edu/​18th​_century/​nworder​.asp.
    5. Stephen Middleton, The Black Laws: Race and the Legal Process in Early
Ohio (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2005).
    6. The National Register: A Weekly Paper, Containing a Series of the Impor-
tant Public Documents, and the Proceedings of Congress, Volume VII (Washing-
ton City: 1819), 125.
    7. Conference committee report on the Missouri Compromise, March
1, 1820; Joint Committee of Conference on the Missouri Bill, 03/01/1820-
03/06/1820; Record Group 128l; Records of Joint Committees of Congress,
1789-1989; National Archives. https://​www​.ourdocuments​.gov/​doc​.php​?flash​=​
true​&​doc​=​22​&​page​=​transcript.
    8. William M. Wiecek, The Sources of Antislavery Constitutionalism in
America, 1760–1848 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977).
    9. Richard Furman, Rev. Dr. Richard Furman’s Exposition of the Views of
the Baptists, Relative to the Colored Population of the United States (Charleston,
SC: Miller, 1923), 1.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 6 8 chapt er 13


             10. Nicholas Wood, “‘A Sacrifice on the Altar of Slavery’: Doughface Poli-
        tics and Black Disenfranchisement in Pennsylvania, 1837–1838,” Journal of the
        Early Republic 31, no. 1 (Spring 2011): 75–106.
             11. Michael F. Holt, The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jack-
        sonian Politics and the Onset of the Civil War (New York: Oxford University
        Press, 1999).
             12. James K. Polk: “Inaugural Address,” March 4, 1845. Gerhard Peters and
        John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project. http://​www​.presidency​.ucsb​
        .edu/​ws/​?pid​=​25814.
             13. Richard Peters, Report of the Case of Edward Prigg against the Com-
        monwealth of Pennsylvania (Philadelphia: Johnson, 1842).
             14. Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an
        American Slave, Written by Himself (Boston: Anti-Slavery Office, 1845). http://​
        docsouth​.unc​.edu/​neh/​douglass/​douglass​.html.
             15. See Sojourner Truth, The Narrative of Sojourner Truth, ed. Olive Gil-
        bert (Boston: Author, 1850), http://​digital​.library​.upenn​.edu/​women/​truth/​1850​
        /1850​.html; Maria Stewart, Maria W. Stewart: America’s First Black Woman Po-
        litical Writer, ed. Marilyn Richardson (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
        1987); James McCune Smith, The Works of James McCune Smith: Black Intel-
        lectual and Abolitionist, ed. John Stauffer (New York: Oxford University Press,
        2007); Frank A. Rollin, Life and Public Services of Martin R. Delaney (Bos-
        ton: Lee and Shephard, 1868), especially 313–367. https://​          archive​
                                                                                    .org/​
                                                                                         details​
        /lifepublicservic00inroll.
             16. Eric Foner, Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Repub-
        lican Party Before the Civil War (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970).
             17. Joseph Rayback, Free Soil: The Election of 1848 (Lexington: University
        Press of Kentucky, 2014).
             18. Eleanor Flexnor, Century of Struggle: The Women’s Rights Movement in
        the United States (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975).
             19. Report of the Woman’s Rights Convention, Held at Seneca Falls, N.Y.,
        July 19th and 20th, 1848 (Rochester: Dick, 1848).
             20. Gloria J. Browne-Marshall, Race, Law and American Society, Second
        Edition (New York: Routledge, 2013), 56.
             21. Michael Winship, “Uncle Tom’s Cabin: History of the Book in the 19th-
        Century United States” (Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 2007). http://​utc​
        .iath​.virginia​.edu/​interpret/​exhibits/​winship/​winship​.html, accessed August 1,
        2015.
             22. Charles Harold Nichols, Many Thousand Gone: The Ex-slaves’ Account
        of Their Bondage and Freedom (Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 1963), 156.
             23. Amos A. Lawrence to Giles Richards, June 1, 1854, quoted in Jane J.
        Pease and William H. Pease, eds., The Fugitive Slave Law and Anthony Burns: A
        Problem in Law Enforcement (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1975), 43.
             24. Tyler Anbinder, Nativism and Slavery: The Northern Know Nothings
        and the Politics of the 1850s (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992).
             25. Charles Sumner, The Crime Against Kansas, Speech of Hon. Charles
        Sumner in the Senate of the United States (New York: Greeley and McElrath,

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he S e cti o n a l Cr isis  369


1856). https://​www​.senate​.gov/​artandhistory/​history/​resources/​pdf/​Crime​Against​
KSSpeech​.pdf.
    26. Nicole Etcheson, Bleeding Kansas: Contested Liberty in the Civil War
Era (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2004).
    27. Williamjames Hull Hoffer, The Caning of Charles Sumner: Honor, Ideal-
ism, and the Origins of the Civil War (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
2010), 92.
    28. Abraham Lincoln, “Peoria Speech, October 16, 1854,” in Collected
Works of Abraham Lincoln, ed. Roy P. Basler (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 1953), 247–283. https://​www​.nps​.gov/​liho/​learn/​historyculture​
/peoriaspeech​.htm.
    29. Judgment in the U.S. Supreme Court Case Dred Scott v. John F.A. Sanford,
March 6, 1857; Case Files 1792-1995; Record Group 267; Records of the Su-
preme Court of the United States; National Archives. http://​www​.ourdocuments​
.gov/​doc​.php​?flash​=​true​&​doc​=​29.
    30. Rodney O. Davis and Douglas L. Wilson, eds., The Lincoln Douglas
Debates (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2008), 68.
    31. Republican Party Platforms: “Republican Party Platform of 1860,” May
17, 1860. Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project.
http://​www​.presidency​.ucsb​.edu/​ws/​?pid​=​29620.
    32. Horace Greeley, The American Conflict: A History of the Great Rebel-
lion in the United States of America, 1860–1864, Volume 1 (Hartford, CT: Case,
1864), 366–367.
    33. “Declaration of the Immediate Causes Which Induce and Justify the Se-
cession of South Carolina from the Federal Union,” The Avalon Project at the
Yale Law School. http://​avalon​.law​.yale​.edu/​19th​_century/​csa​_scarsec​.asp., ac-
cessed August 1, 2015.

R e c omm e n d e d R e a d i n g
Bacon, Margaret Hope. But One Race: The Life of Robert Purvis. Albany: SUNY
    Press, 2012.
Baker, Jean H. Affairs of Party: The Political Culture of Northern Democrats in
    the Mid-Nineteenth Century. New York: Fordham University Press, 1983.
Berlin, Ira. Generations of Captivity: A History of African-American Slaves.
    Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2003.
Boydston, Jeanne. Home and Work: Housework, Wages, and the Ideology of
    Labor in the Early Republic. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Bracey, Christopher Alan, Paul Finkelman, and David Thomas Konig, eds. The
    Dred Scott Case: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on Race and
    Law. Athens: Ohio University Press, 2010.
Cutter, Barbara. Domestic Devils, Battlefield Angels: The Radicalization of
    American Womanhood, 1830–1865. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University
    Press, 2003.
Engs, Robert F., and Randall M. Miller, eds. The Birth of the Grand Old Party:
    The Republicans’ First Generation. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
    Press, 2002.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 7 0 chapt er 13


        Etcheson, Nicole. Bleeding Kansas: Contested Liberty in the Civil War Era. Law-
             rence: University Press of Kansas, 2004.
        Flexnor, Eleanor. Century of Struggle: The Women’s Rights Movement in the
             United States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975.
        Foner, Eric. Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican
             Party Before the Civil War. New York: Oxford University Press, 1970.
        Grant, Susan-Mary. North over South: Northern Nationalism and American
             Identity in the Antebellum Era. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2000.
        Holt, Michael F. The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jacksonian Pol-
             itics and the Onset of the Civil War. New York: Oxford University Press,
             1999.
        Howe, Daniel Walker. The Political Culture of the American Whigs. Chicago:
             University of Chicago Press, 1979.
        Jeffrey, Julie Roy. The Great Silent Army of Abolitionism: Ordinary Women in
             the Antislavery Movement. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
             1998.
        Jones, Martha S. All Bound Up Together: The Woman Question in African
             American Public Culture, 1830–1900. Chapel Hill: University of North Car-
             olina Press, 2007.
        Kantrowitz, Stephen. More Than Freedom: Fighting for Black Citizenship in a
             White Republic, 1829–1889. New York: Penguin, 2012.
        McDaniel, W. Caleb. The Problem of Democracy in the Age of Slavery: Garriso-
             nian Abolitionists and Transatlantic Reform. Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2013.
        Oakes, James. The Scorpion’s Sting: Antislavery and the Coming of the Civil War.
             New York: Norton, 2014.
        Potter, David M. The Impending Crisis, 1848–1861. New York: HarperCollins,
             1976.
        Quarles, Benjamin. Allies for Freedom: Blacks and John Brown. New York: Ox-
             ford University Press, 1974.
        Robertson, Stacey. Hearts Beating for Liberty: Women Abolitionists in the Old
             Northwest. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010.
        Sinha, Manisha. The Counterrevolution of Slavery: Politics and Ideology in An-
             tebellum South Carolina. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
             2000.
        Smith, Kimberly K. The Dominion of Voice: Riot, Reason and Romance in An-
             tebellum American Political Thought. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas,
             1999.
        Varon, Elizabeth. Disunion! The Coming of the American Civil War, 1789–1859.
             Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2008.
        Zaeske, Susan. Signatures of Citizenship: Petitioning, Antislavery, and Women’s
             Political Identity. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.




  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
14
The Civil War

I. Introduction
The American Civil War, the bloodiest in the nation’s history, resulted        Collecting
                                                                               Remains of the
in approximately 750,000 deaths.1 The war touched the life of nearly           Dead. Cold
every American as military mobilization reached levels never seen be-          Harbor, Virginia.
                                                                               April, 1865. Li-
fore or since. Most northern soldiers went to war to preserve the Union,
                                                                               brary of Congress.
but the war ultimately transformed into a struggle to eradicate slavery.
African Americans, both enslaved and free, pressed the issue of eman-
cipation and nurtured this transformation. Simultaneously, women
thrust themselves into critical wartime roles while navigating a world
without many men of military age. The Civil War was a defining event
in the history of the United States and, for the Americans thrust into it,
a wrenching one.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 7 2 chapt er 14



        II. The Election of 1860 and Secession
        The 1860 presidential election was chaotic. In April, the Democratic
        Party convened in Charleston, South Carolina, the bastion of secessionist
        thought in the South. The goal was to nominate a candidate for the party
        ticket, but the party was deeply divided. Northern Democrats pulled for
        Senator Stephen Douglas, a pro-slavery moderate championing popu-
        lar sovereignty, while southern Democrats were intent on endorsing
        someone other than Douglas. The parties leaders’ refusal to include a
        pro-slavery platform resulted in southern delegates walking out of the
        convention, preventing Douglas from gaining the two-thirds majority re-
        quired for a nomination. The Democrats ended up with two presidential
        candidates. A subsequent convention in Baltimore nominated Douglas,
        while southerners nominated the current vice president, John C. Breck-
        inridge of Kentucky, as their presidential candidate. The nation’s oldest
        party had split over differences in policy toward slavery.2
            Initially, the Republicans were hardly unified around a single candi-
        date themselves. Several leading Republican men vied for their party’s
        nomination. A consensus emerged at the May 1860 convention that the
        party’s nominee would need to carry all the free states—for only in that
        situation could a Republican nominee potentially win. New York Senator
        William Seward, a leading contender, was passed over. Seward’s pro-im-
        migrant position posed a potential obstacle, particularly in Pennsylvania
        and New Jersey. Abraham Lincoln of Illinois, as a relatively unknown
        but likable politician, rose from a pool of potential candidates and was
        selected by the delegates on the third ballot. The electoral landscape was
        further complicated through the emergence of a fourth candidate, Ten-
        nessee’s John Bell, heading the Constitutional Union Party. The Consti-
        tutional Unionists, composed of former Whigs who teamed up with some
        southern Democrats, made it their mission to avoid the specter of seces-
        sion while doing little else to address the issues tearing the country apart.
            Abraham Lincoln’s nomination proved a great windfall for the Repub-
        lican Party. Lincoln carried all free states with the exception of New Jersey
        (which he split with Douglas). Of the voting electorate, 81.2 percent came
        out to vote—at that point the highest ever for a presidential election. Lin-
        coln received less than 40 percent of the popular vote, but with the field
        so split, that percentage yielded 180 electoral votes. Lincoln was trailed by
        Breckinridge with his 72 electoral votes, carrying eleven of the fifteen slave
        states; Bell came in third with 39 electoral votes; and Douglas came in last,
        only able to garner 12 electoral votes despite carrying almost 30 percent

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  373




of the popular vote. Since the Republican platform prohibited the expan-         Abraham Lin-
                                                                                 coln, August 13,
sion of slavery in future western states, all future Confederate states, with
                                                                                 1860. Library of
the exception of Virginia, excluded Lincoln’s name from their ballots.3          Congress.
    The election of Lincoln and the perceived threat to the institution of
slavery proved too much for the deep southern states. South Carolina
acted almost immediately, calling a convention to declare secession. On
December 20, 1860, the South Carolina convention voted unanimously
169–0 to dissolve their union with the United States.4 The other states
across the Deep South quickly followed suit. Mississippi adopted their
own resolution on January 9, 1861, Florida followed on January 10, Ala-
bama on January 11, Georgia on January 19, Louisiana on January 26,
and Texas on February 1. Texas was the only state to put the issue up for
a popular vote, but secession was widely popular throughout the South.
    Confederates quickly shed their American identity and adopted a new
Confederate nationalism. Confederate nationalism was based on several
ideals, foremost among these being slavery. As Confederate vice president
Alexander Stephens stated, the Confederacy’s “foundations are laid, its cor-
nerstone rests, upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white
man; that slavery . . . is his natural and normal condition.”5 The election of
Lincoln in 1860 demonstrated that the South was politically overwhelmed.
Slavery was omnipresent in the prewar South, and it served as the most
common frame of reference for unequal power. To a southern man, there
was no fate more terrifying than the thought of being reduced to the level
of a slave. Religion likewise shaped Confederate nationalism, as southern-

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 7 4 chapt er 14




The emblems of nationalism on this currency reveal much about the ideology underpinning the Confed-
eracy: George Washington standing stately in a Roman toga indicates the belief in the South’s honorable
and aristocratic past; John C. Calhoun’s portrait emphasizes the Confederate argument of the importance
of states’ rights; and, most importantly, the image of African Americans working in fields demonstrates
slavery’s position as foundational to the Confederacy. A five-dollar and a one-hundred-dollar Confederate
States of America interest bearing banknote, c. 1861 and 1862. Wikimedia.


                      ers believed that the Confederacy was fulfilling God’s will. The Confed-
                      eracy even veered from the American constitution by explicitly invoking
                      Christianity in their founding ­document. Yet in every case, all rationale for
                      secession could be thoroughly tied to slavery. “Our position is thoroughly
                      identified with the institution of slavery—the greatest material interest of
                      the world,” proclaimed the Mississippi statement of secession.6 Thus for
                      the original seven Confederate states (and the four that would subsequently
                      join), slavery’s existence was the essential core of the fledging Confederacy.
                          Not all southerners participated in Confederate nationalism. Unionist
                      southerners, most common in the upcountry where slavery was weakest,

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  375


retained their loyalty to the Union. These southerners joined the Union
army, that is, the army of the United States of America, and worked to
defeat the Confederacy.7 Black southerners, most of whom were slaves,
overwhelmingly supported the Union, often running away from planta-
tions and forcing the Union army to reckon with slavery.8
    President James Buchanan would not directly address the issue of se-
cession prior to his term’s end in early March. Any effort to try to solve the
issue therefore fell upon Congress, specifically a Committee of Thirteen in-
cluding prominent men such as Stephen Douglas, William Seward, Robert
Toombs, and John Crittenden. In what became known as “Crittenden’s
Compromise,” Senator Crittenden proposed a series of Constitutional
amendments that guaranteed slavery in southern states and territories, de-
nied the federal government interstate slave trade regulatory power, and
offered to compensate owners of unrecovered fugitive slaves. The Com-
mittee of Thirteen ultimately voted down the measure, and it likewise
failed in the full Senate vote (25–23). Reconciliation appeared impossible.9
    The seven seceding states met in Montgomery, Alabama on Febru-
ary 4 to organize a new nation. The delegates selected Jefferson Davis
of Mississippi as president and established a capital in Montgomery,
Alabama (it would move to Richmond in May). Whether other states of
the Upper South would join the Confederacy remained uncertain. By the
early spring of 1861, North Carolina and Tennessee had not held seces-
sion conventions, while voters in Virginia, Missouri, and Arkansas ini-
tially voted down secession. Despite this temporary boost to the Union,
it became abundantly clear that these acts of loyalty in the Upper South
were highly conditional and relied on a clear lack of intervention on the
part of the federal government. This was the precarious political situation
facing Abraham Lincoln following his inauguration on March 4, 1861.


III. A War for Union 1861–1863
In his inaugural address, Lincoln declared secession “legally void.”10
While he did not intend to invade southern states, he would use force to
maintain possession of federal property within seceded states. Attention
quickly shifted to the federal installation of Fort Sumter in Charleston,
South Carolina. The fort was in need of supplies, and Lincoln intended
to resupply it. South Carolina called for U.S. soldiers to evacuate the
fort. Commanding officer Major Robert Anderson refused. On April 12,
1861, Confederate Brigadier General P. G. T. Beauregard fired on the
fort. Anderson surrendered on April 13 and the Union troops evacuated.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 7 6 chapt er 14




Sent to then–secretary of war Simon
Cameron on April 13, 1861, this telegraph
announced that after thirty hours of defend-
ing Fort Sumter, Major Robert Anderson had
accepted the evacuation offered by Confed-
erate General Beauregard. The Union had
surrendered Fort Sumter, and the Civil War
had officially begun. Telegram from Maj.
Robert Anderson to Hon. Simon Cameron,
Secretary, announcing his withdrawal from
Fort Sumter, April 18, 1861; Records of
the Adjutant General’s Office, 1780s–1917;
Record Group 94. National Archives.



                      In response to the attack, President Abraham Lincoln called for seventy-
                      five thousand volunteers to serve three months to suppress the rebellion.
                      The American Civil War had begun.
                          The assault on Fort Sumter and subsequent call for troops provoked
                      several Upper South states to join the Confederacy. In total, eleven states
                      renounced their allegiance to the United States. The new Confederate
                      nation was predicated on the institution of slavery and the promotion
                      of any and all interests that reinforced that objective. Some southerners
                      couched their defense of slavery as a preservation of states’ rights. But in
                      order to protect slavery, the Confederate constitution left even less power
                      to the states than the U.S. Constitution, an irony not lost on many.
                          Shortly after Lincoln’s call for troops, the Union adopted General-
                      in-Chief Winfield Scott’s Anaconda Plan to suppress the rebellion. This
                      strategy intended to strangle the Confederacy by cutting off access to
                      coastal ports and inland waterways via a naval blockade. Ground troops
                      would enter the interior. Like an anaconda snake, they planned to sur-
                      round and squeeze the Confederacy.
                          The border states of Delaware, Maryland, Missouri, and Kentucky
                      maintained geographic, social, political, and economic connections to
                      both the North and the South. All four were immediately critical to the

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  377




outcome of the conflict. Abraham Lincoln famously quipped, “I think to         Winfield Scott’s
                                                                               Anaconda Plan
lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game.”11 Lincoln         sought to slowly
and his military advisors realized that the loss of the border states could    squeeze the
mean a significant decrease in Union resources and threaten the capital in     South dry of its
                                                                               resources, block-
Washington. Consequently, Lincoln hoped to foster loyalty among their          ing all coastal
citizens, so Union forces could minimize their occupation. In spite of ter-    ports and inland
                                                                               waterways to
rible guerrilla warfare in Missouri and Kentucky, the four border states       prevent the impor-
remained loyal to the Union throughout the war.                                tation of goods
                                                                               or the export of
    Foreign countries, primarily in Europe, also watched the unfolding         cotton. This print
war with deep interest. The United States represented the greatest ex-         illustrates the
ample of democratic thought at the time, and individuals from as far           Union’s plan. J.
                                                                               B. Elliott, Scott’s
afield as Britain, France, Spain, Russia, and beyond closely followed          great snake.
events across the Atlantic Ocean. If the democratic experiment within the      Entered according
                                                                               to Act of Congress
United States failed, many democratic activists in Europe wondered what        in the year 1861,
hope might exist for such experiments elsewhere. Conversely, those with        1861. Library of
                                                                               Congress.
close ties to the cotton industry watched with other concerns. War meant
the possibility of disrupting the cotton supply, and disruption could have
catastrophic ramifications in commercial and financial markets abroad.

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 7 8 chapt er 14


                          While Lincoln, his cabinet, and the War Department devised strategies
                      to defeat the rebel insurrection, black Americans quickly forced the issue of
                      slavery as a primary issue in the debate. As early as 1861, black Americans
                      implored the Lincoln administration to serve in the army and navy.12 Lin-
                      coln initially waged a conservative, limited war. He believed that the pres-
                      ence of African American troops would threaten the loyalty of slaveholding
                      border states, and white volunteers might refuse to serve alongside black
                      men. However, army commanders could not ignore the growing popula-
                      tions of formerly enslaved people who escaped to freedom behind Union
                      army lines. These former enslaved people took a proactive stance early in
                      the war and forced the federal government to act. As the number of refu-
                      gees ballooned, Lincoln and Congress found it harder to avoid the issue.13
                          In May 1861, General Benjamin F. Butler went over his superiors’ heads
                      and began accepting fugitive slaves who came to Fort Monroe in Virginia.
                      In order to avoid the issue of the slaves’ freedom, Butler reasoned that
                      runaway slaves were “contraband of war,” and he had as much a right to




Enslaved African Americans who took freedom into their own hands and ran to Union lines congregated in
what were called contraband camps, which existed alongside Union Army camps. As is evident in the pho-
tograph, these were crude, disorganized, and dirty places. But they were still centers of freedom for those
fleeing slavery. Contraband camp, Richmond, Virginia, 1865. The Camp of the Contrabands on the Banks
of the Mississippi, Fort Pickering, Memphis, Tennessee, 1862. Courtesy American Antiquarian Society.

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  379


seize them as he did to seize enemy horses or cannons.14 Later that summer
Congress affirmed Butler’s policy in the First Confiscation Act. The act left
“contrabands,” as these runaways were called, in a state of limbo. Once a
slave escaped to Union lines, her master’s claim was nullified. She was not,
however, a free citizen of the United States. Runaways lived in “contraband
camps,” where disease and malnutrition were rampant. Women and men
were required to perform the drudge work of war: raising fortifications,
cooking meals, and laying railroad tracks. Still, life as a contraband offered
a potential path to freedom, and thousands of slaves seized the opportunity.
    Fugitive slaves posed a dilemma for the Union military. Soldiers were
forbidden to interfere with slavery or assist runaways, but many soldiers
found such a policy unchristian. Even those indifferent to slavery were
reluctant to turn away potential laborers or help the enemy by returning
his property. Also, fugitive slaves could provide useful information on the
local terrain and the movements of Confederate troops. Union officers
became particularly reluctant to turn away fugitive slaves when Confed-
erate commanders began forcing slaves to work on fortifications. Every
slave who escaped to Union lines was a loss to the Confederate war effort.
    Any hopes for a brief conflict were eradicated when Union and Con-
federate forces met at the Battle of Bull Run, near Manassas, Virginia.




Photography captured the horrors of war as never before. Some Civil War photographers arranged the
actors in their frames to capture the best picture, even repositioning bodies of dead soldiers for battlefield
photos. Alexander Gardner, [Antietam, Md. Confederate dead by a fence on the Hagerstown road], Sep-
tember 1862. Library of Congress.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 8 0 chapt er 14


                      While not particularly deadly, the Confederate victory proved that the
                      Civil War would be long and costly. Furthermore, in response to the
                      embarrassing Union rout, Lincoln removed Brigadier General Irvin
                      ­
                      McDowell and promoted Major General George B. McClellan to com-
                      mander of the newly formed Army of the Potomac. For nearly a year
                      after the First Battle of Bull Run, the Eastern Theater remained relatively
                      silent. Smaller engagements only resulted in a bloody stalemate.
                          But while the military remained quiet, the same could not be said of
                      Republicans in Washington. The absence of fractious, stalling southern-
                      ers in Congress allowed Republicans to finally pass the Whig economic
                      package, including the Homestead Act, the Land-Grant College Act (aka
                      the Morrill Act), and the Pacific Railroad Act.15 The federal government




New and more destructive warfare technology emerged during this time that used discoveries and innova-
tions in other areas of life, like transportation. This photograph shows Robert E. Lee’s railroad gun and
crew used in the main eastern theater of war at the siege of Petersburg, June 1864–April 1865. Petersburg,
Va. Railroad gun and crew, between 1864 and 1865. Library of Congress.

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  381


also began moving toward a more nationally controlled currency system
(the greenback) and the creation of banks with national characteristics.
Such acts proved instrumental in the expansion of the federal govern-
ment and industry.
     The Democratic Party, absent its southern leaders, divided into two
camps. War Democrats largely stood behind President Lincoln. Peace
Democrats—also known as Copperheads—clashed frequently with both
War Democrats and Republicans. Copperheads were sympathetic to the
Confederacy; they exploited public antiwar sentiment (often the result
of a lost battle or mounting casualties) and tried to push President Lin-
coln to negotiate an immediate peace, regardless of political leverage or
bargaining power. Had the Copperheads succeeded in bringing about im-
mediate peace, the Union would have been forced to recognize the Con-
federacy as a separate and legitimate government and the institution of
slavery would have remained intact.
     While Washington buzzed with political activity, military life con-
sisted of relative monotony punctuated by brief periods of horror. Daily
life for a Civil War soldier was one of routine. A typical day began around
six in the morning and involved drill, marching, lunch break, and more
drilling followed by policing the camp. Weapon inspection and cleaning
followed, perhaps one final drill, dinner, and taps around nine or nine
thirty in the evening. Soldiers in both armies grew weary of the routine.
Picketing or foraging afforded welcome distractions to the monotony.
     Soldiers devised clever ways of dealing with the boredom of camp life.
The most common was writing. These were highly literate armies; nine
out of every ten Federals and eight out of every ten Confederates could
read and write.16 Letters home served as a tether linking soldiers to their
loved ones. Soldiers also read; newspapers were in high demand. News
of battles, events in Europe, politics in Washington and Richmond, and
local concerns were voraciously sought and traded.
     While there were nurses, camp followers, and some women who dis-
guised themselves as men, camp life was overwhelmingly male. Soldiers
drank liquor, smoked tobacco, gambled, and swore. Social commenta-
tors feared that when these men returned home, with their hard-drinking
and irreligious ways, all decency, faith, and temperance would depart.
But not all methods of distraction were detrimental. Soldiers also or-
ganized debate societies, composed music, sang songs, wrestled, raced
horses, boxed, and played sports.
     Neither side could consistently provide supplies for their soldiers, so
it was not uncommon, though officially forbidden, for common soldiers

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 8 2 chapt er 14


        to trade with the enemy. Confederate soldiers prized northern newspa-
        pers and coffee. Northerners were glad to exchange these for southern
        tobacco. Supply shortages and poor sanitation were synonymous with
        Civil War armies. The close proximity of thousands of men bred disease.
        Lice were soldiers’ daily companions.
            Music was popular among the soldiers of both armies, creating a di-
        version from the boredom and horror of the war. As a result, soldiers often
        sang on fatigue duty and while in camp. Favorite songs often reminded
        the soldiers of home, including “Lorena,” “Home, Sweet Home,” and
        “Just Before the Battle, Mother.” Dances held in camp offered another
        way to enjoy music. Since there were often few women nearby, soldiers
        would dance with one another.
            When the Civil War broke out, one of the most popular songs among
        soldiers and civilians was “John Brown’s Body,” which began “John
        Brown’s body lies a-mouldering in the grave.” Started as a Union anthem
        praising John Brown’s actions at Harper’s Ferry, Virginia, then used by
        Confederates to vilify Brown, both sides’ version of the song stressed that
        they were on the right side. Eventually the words to Julia Ward Howe’s
        poem “The Battle Hymn of the Republic” were set to the melody, further
        implying Union success. The themes of popular songs changed over the
        course of the war, as feelings of inevitable success alternated with feelings
        of terror and despair.17
            After an extensive delay on the part of Union commander George
        McClellan, his 120,000-man Army of the Potomac moved via ship to the
        peninsula between the York and James Rivers in Virginia. Rather than
        crossing overland via the former battlefield at Manassas Junction, Mc-
        Clellan attempted to swing around the rebel forces and enter the capital
        of Richmond before they knew what hit them. McClellan, however, was
        an overly cautious man who consistently overestimated his adversaries’
        numbers. This cautious approach played into the Confederates’ favor on
        the outskirts of Richmond. Confederate General Robert E. Lee, recently
        appointed commander of the Army of Northern Virginia, forced McClel-
        lan to retreat from Richmond, and his Peninsular Campaign became a
        tremendous failure.18
            Union forces met with little success in the East, but the Western The-
        ater provided hope for the United States. In February 1862, men under
        Union general Ulysses S. Grant captured Forts Henry and Donelson
        along the Tennessee River. Fighting in the West greatly differed from that
        in the East. At the First Battle of Bull Run, for example, two large armies
        fought for control of the nations’ capitals, while in the West, Union and

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  383


Confederate forces fought for control of the rivers, since the Mississippi
River and its tributaries were key components of the Union’s Anaconda
Plan. One of the deadliest of these clashes occurred along the Tennessee
River at the Battle of Shiloh on April 6–7, 1862. This battle, lasting only
two days, was the costliest single battle in American history up to that
time. The Union victory shocked both the Union and the Confederacy
with approximately twenty-three thousand casualties, a number that ex-
ceeded casualties from all of the United States’ previous wars combined.19
The subsequent capture of New Orleans by Union forces proved a heavy
blow to the Confederacy and capped an 1862 spring of success in the
Western Theater.
   The Union and Confederate navies helped or hindered army move-
ments around the many marine environments of the southern United




The creation of black regiments was another kind of innovation during the Civil War. Northern free blacks
and newly freed slaves joined together under the leadership of white officers to fight for the Union cause.
This novelty was not only beneficial for the Union war effort; it also showed the Confederacy that the
Union sought to destroy the foundational institution (slavery) on which their nation was built. William
Morris Smith, [District of Columbia. Company E, 4th U.S. Colored Infantry, at Fort Lincoln], between
1863 and 1866. Library of Congress.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 8 4 chapt er 14


        States. Each navy employed the latest technology to outmatch the other.
        The Confederate navy, led by Stephen Russell Mallory, had the unenvi-
        able task of constructing a fleet from scratch and trying to fend off a
        vastly better equipped Union navy. Led by Gideon Welles of Connecti-
        cut, the Union navy successfully implemented General-in-Chief Winfield
        Scott’s Anaconda Plan. The future of naval warfare also emerged in the
        spring of 1862 as two “ironclad” warships fought a duel at Hampton
        Roads, Virginia. The age of the wooden sail was gone and naval war-
        fare would be fundamentally altered. While advances in naval technol-
        ogy ruled the seas, African Americans on the ground were complicating
        Union war aims to an even greater degree.
            By the summer of 1862, the actions of black Americans were push-
        ing the Union toward a full-blown war of emancipation.20 Following the
        First Confiscation Act, in April 1862, Congress abolished the institution
        of slavery in the District of Columbia. In July 1862, Congress passed
        the Second Confiscation Act, effectively emancipating slaves that came
        under Union control. Word traveled fast among enslaved people, and
        this legislation led to even more runaways making their way into Union
        lines. Abraham Lincoln’s thinking began to evolve. By the summer of
        1862, Lincoln first floated the idea of an Emancipation Proclamation to
        members of his cabinet. By August 1862, he proposed the first iteration
        of the Emancipation Proclamation. While his cabinet supported such an
        idea, secretary of state William Seward insisted that Lincoln wait for a
        “decisive” Union victory so the proclamation would not appear too des-
        perate a measure on the part of a failing government.
            This decisive moment that prompted the issuance of the Emancipa-
        tion Proclamation occurred in the fall of 1862 along Antietam Creek
        in Maryland. Emboldened by their success in the previous spring and
        summer, Lee and Confederate president Jefferson Davis planned to win
        a decisive victory in Union territory and end the war. On September 17,
        1862, McClellan’s and Lee’s forces collided at the Battle of Antietam
        near the town of Sharpsburg. This battle was the first major battle of the
        Civil War to occur on Union soil. It remains the bloodiest single day in
        American history: over twenty thousand soldiers were killed, wounded,
        or missing.
            Despite the Confederate withdrawal and the high death toll, the Bat-
        tle of Antietam was not a decisive Union victory. It did, however, result
        in enough of a victory for Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclama-
        tion, which freed slaves in areas under Confederate control. There were



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  385




This African American family dressed in their finest clothes (including a USCT uniform) for this pho-
tograph, projecting respectability and dignity that was at odds with the southern perception of black
Americans. [Unidentified African American soldier in Union uniform with wife and two daughters], be-
tween 1863 and 1865. Library of Congress.


significant exemptions to the Emancipation Proclamation, including the
border states and parts of other states in the Confederacy. A far cry from
a universal end to slavery, the Emancipation Proclamation nevertheless
proved vital, shifting the war’s aims from simple union to emancipation.
Framing it as a war measure, Lincoln and his cabinet hoped that stripping
the Confederacy of its labor force would not only debilitate the southern
economy but also weaken Confederate morale. Furthermore, the Battle
of Antietam and the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation all but
ensured that the Confederacy would not be recognized by European
powers. Nevertheless, Confederates continued fighting. Union and Con-
federate forces clashed again at Fredericksburg, Virginia, in December
1862. This Confederate victory resulted in staggering Union casualties.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 8 6 chapt er 14



        IV. War for Emancipation 1863–1865
        As Union armies penetrated deeper into the Confederacy, politicians and
        generals came to understand the necessity and benefit of enlisting black
        men in the army and navy. Although a few commanders began forming
        black units in 1862, such as Massachusetts abolitionist Thomas Went-
        worth Higginson’s First South Carolina Volunteers (the first regiment of
        black soldiers), widespread enlistment did not occur until the Emancipa-
        tion Proclamation went into effect on January 1, 1863. “And I further
        declare and make known,” Lincoln’s proclamation read, “that such per-
        sons of suitable condition, will be received into the armed service of the
        United States to garrison forts, positions, stations, and other places, and
        to man vessels of all sorts in said service.”21
            The language describing black enlistment indicated Lincoln’s implicit
        desire to segregate African American troops from the main campaigning
        armies of white soldiers. “I believe it is a resource which, if vigorously
        applied now, will soon close the contest. It works doubly, weakening the
        enemy and strengthening us,” Lincoln remarked in August 1863 about
        black soldiering.22 Although more than 180,000 black men (10 percent
        of the Union army) served during the war, the majority of United States
        Colored Troops (USCT) remained stationed behind the lines as garrison
        forces, often laboring and performing noncombat roles.
            Black soldiers in the Union army endured rampant discrimination
        and earned less pay than white soldiers, while also facing the possibility
        of being murdered or sold into slavery if captured. James Henry Good-
        ing, a black corporal in the famed 54th Massachusetts Volunteers, wrote
        to Abraham Lincoln in September 1863, questioning why he and his fel-
        low volunteers were paid less than white men. Gooding argued that be-
        cause he and his brethren were born in the United States and selflessly left
        their private lives to enter the army, they should be treated “as American
        SOLDIERS, not as menial hirelings.”23
            African American soldiers defied the inequality of military service and
        used their positions in the army to reshape society, North and South.
        The majority of the USCT had once been enslaved, and their presence as
        armed, blue-clad soldiers sent shock waves throughout the Confederacy.
        To their friends and families, African American soldiers symbolized the
        embodiment of liberation and the destruction of slavery. To white south-
        erners, they represented the utter disruption of the Old South’s racial
        and social hierarchy. As members of armies of occupation, black soldiers



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  387




wielded martial authority in towns and plantations. At the end of the          Two Brothers in
                                                                               Arms. Library of
war, as a black soldier marched by a cluster of Confederate prisoners, he      Congress.
noticed his former master among the group. “Hello, massa,” the soldier
exclaimed, “bottom rail on top dis time!”24
    The majority of the USCT occupied the South by performing garrison
duty; other black soldiers performed admirably on the battlefield, shat-
tering white myths that docile, cowardly black men would fold in the
maelstrom of war. Black troops fought in more than four hundred battles
and skirmishes, including Milliken’s Bend and Port Hudson, Louisiana;
Fort Wagner, South Carolina; Nashville; and the final campaigns to cap-
ture Richmond, Virginia. Fifteen black soldiers received the Medal of
Honor, the highest honor bestowed for military heroism. Through their
voluntarism, service, battlefield contributions, and even death, black sol-
diers laid their claims for citizenship. “Once let a black man get upon his
person the brass letters U.S.” Frederick Douglass, the great black aboli-
tionist, proclaimed, “and there is no power on earth which can deny that
he has earned the right to citizenship.”25
    Many slaves accompanied their masters in the Confederate army.
They served their masters as “camp servants,” cooking their meals, rais-
ing their tents, and carrying their supplies. The Confederacy also im-
pressed slaves to perform manual labor. There are three important points
to make about these “Confederate” slaves. First, their labor was almost
always coerced. Second, people are complicated and have varying, often
contradictory loyalties. A slave could hope in general that the Confed-
eracy would lose but at the same time be concerned for the safety of his
master and the Confederate soldiers he saw on a daily basis.



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 8 8 chapt er 14


            Finally, white Confederates did not see African Americans as their
        equals, much less as soldiers. There was never any doubt that black la-
        borers and camp servants were property. Though historians disagree on
        the matter, it is a stretch to claim that not a single African American ever
        fired a gun for the Confederacy; a camp servant whose master died in
        battle might well pick up his dead master’s gun and continue firing, if for
        no other reason than to protect himself. But this was always on an in-
        formal basis. The Confederate government did, in an act of desperation,
        pass a law in March 1865 allowing for the enlistment of black soldiers,
        but only a few dozen African Americans (mostly Richmond hospital
        workers) had enlisted by the war’s end.
            As 1863 dawned, Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia continued its of-
        fensive strategy in the East. One of the war’s major battles occurred near
        the village of Chancellorsville, Virginia, between April 30 and May 6,
        1863. While the Battle of Chancellorsville was an outstanding Confeder-
        ate victory, it also resulted in heavy casualties and the mortal wounding
        of Confederate major general “Stonewall” Jackson, who was killed by
        friendly fire.
            In spite of Jackson’s death, Lee continued his offensive against fed-
        eral forces and invaded Pennsylvania in the summer of 1863. During the
        three-day battle (July 1–3) at Gettysburg, heavy casualties crippled both
        sides. Yet the devastating July 3 infantry assault on the Union center, also
        known as Pickett’s Charge, caused Lee to retreat from Pennsylvania. The
        Gettysburg Campaign was Lee’s final northern incursion and the Battle
        of Gettysburg remains the bloodiest battle of the war, and in American
        history, with fifty-one thousand casualties.
            Concurrently in the West, Union forces continued their movement
        along the Mississippi River and its tributaries. Grant launched his cam-
        paign against Vicksburg, Mississippi, in the winter of 1862. Known as
        the “Gibraltar of the West,” Vicksburg was the last holdout in the West,
        and its seizure would enable uninhibited travel for Union forces along the
        Mississippi River. Grant’s Vicksburg Campaign, which lasted until July
        4, 1863, ended with the city’s surrender. The fall of Vicksburg split the
        Confederacy in two.
            Despite Union success in the summer of 1863, discontent over the war
        simmered across the North. This was particularly true in the wake of the
        Enrollment Act—the first effort at a draft among the northern populace
        during the Civil War. Working-class northerners were especially angry that
        the wealthy could pay $300 for substitutes, sparing themselves from the
        carnage of war. “A rich man’s war, but a poor man’s fight,” was a popular

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  389


refrain.26 The Emancipation Proclamation convinced many immigrants in
northern cities that freed people would soon take their jobs. These eco-
nomic and racial anxieties culminated in the New York City Draft Riots in
July 1863. Over the span of four days, white rioters killed some 120 citi-
zens, including the lynching of at least eleven black New Yorkers. Property
damage was in the millions, including the complete destruction of more
than fifty properties—most notably that of the Colored Orphan Asylum.
It was the largest civil disturbance to date in the United States (aside from
the war itself) and was only stopped by the deployment of Union soldiers,
some of whom came directly from the battlefield at Gettysburg.
    Elsewhere, the North produced widespread displays of unity. Sanitary
fairs originated in the Old Northwest and raised millions of dollars for
Union soldiers. Indeed, many women rose to take pivotal leadership roles
                                                                                Thomas Nast,
in the sanitary fairs—a clear contribution to the northern war effort. The
                                                                                “Our Heroines,
fairs also encouraged national unity within the North—something that            United States
became more important as the war dragged on and casualties continued            Sanitary Commis-
                                                                                sion,” in Harper’s
to mount. The northern homefront was complicated: overt displays of             Weekly, April 9,
loyalty contrasted with violent dissent.                                        1864. Cushing/
                                                                                Whitney Medical
    A similar situation played out in the Confederacy. The Confederate          Library at Yale
Congress passed its first conscription act in the spring of 1862, a full year   University.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 9 0 chapt er 14


        before its northern counterpart. Military service was required from all
        able-bodied males between ages eighteen and thirty-five (eventually ex-
        tended to forty-five). Notable class exemptions likewise existed in the Con-
        federacy: those who owned twenty or more slaves could escape the draft.
        Popular discontent reached a boiling point in 1863. Through the spring
        of 1863 consistent food shortages led to “bread riots” in several Con-
        federate cities, most notably Richmond, Virginia, and the Georgia cities
        of Augusta, Macon, and Columbus. Confederate women led these mobs
        to protest food shortages and rampant inflation within the Confeder-
        ate South. Exerting their own political control, women dramatically im-
        pacted the war through violent actions in these cases, as well as constant
        petitions to governors for aid and the release of husbands from military
        service. One of these women wrote a letter to North Carolina governor
        Zebulon Vance, saying, “Especially for the sake of suffering women and
        children, do try and stop this cruel war.”27 Confederates waged a multi-
        front struggle against Union incursion and internal dissent.
            For some women, the best way to support their cause was spying on
        the enemy. When the war broke out, Rose O’Neal Greenhow was living
        in Washington, D.C., where she traveled in high social circles, gathering
        information for her Confederate contact. Suspecting Greenhow of espio-
        nage, Allan Pinkerton placed her under surveillance, instigated a raid on
        her house to gather evidence, and then placed her under house arrest,
        after which she was incarcerated in Old Capitol Prison. Upon her release,
        she was sent, under guard, to Baltimore, Maryland. From there Green-
        how went to Europe to attempt to bring support to the Confederacy.
        Failing in her efforts, Greenhow decided to return to America, board-
        ing the blockade runner Condor, which ran aground near Wilmington,
        North Carolina. Subsequently, she drowned after her lifeboat capsized in
        a storm. Greenhow gave her life for the Confederate cause, while Eliza-
        beth “Crazy Bet” Van Lew sacrificed her social standing for the Union.
        Van Lew was from a prominent Richmond, Virginia, family and spied
        on the Confederacy, leading to her being “held in contempt & scorn by
        the narrow minded men and women of my city for my loyalty.”28 In-
        deed, when General Ulysses Grant took control of Richmond, he placed
        a special guard on Van Lew. In addition to her espionage activities, Van
        Lew also acted as a nurse to Union prisoners in Libby Prison. For pro-
        Confederate southern women, there were more opportunities to show
        their scorn for the enemy. Some women in New Orleans took these dem-
        onstrations to the level of dumping their chamber pots onto the heads
        of unsuspecting federal soldiers who stood underneath their balconies,

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  391




Pauline Cushman was an American actress and a wartime spy. Using her guile to fraternize with Confeder-
ate officers, Cushman snuck military plans and drawings to Union officials in her shoes. She was caught,
tried, and sentenced to death but was apparently saved days before her execution by the occupation of her
native New Orleans by Union forces. Whether as spies, nurses, or textile workers, women were essential to
the Union war effort. Pauline Cushman, between 1855 and 1865. Library of Congress.



leading to Benjamin Butler’s infamous General Order Number 28, which
arrested all rebellious women as prostitutes.
     Military strategy shifted in 1864. The new tactics of “hard war”
evolved slowly, as restraint toward southern civilians and property ul-
timately gave way to a concerted effort to demoralize southern civil-
ians and destroy the southern economy. Grant’s successes at Vicksburg
and Chattanooga, Tennessee (November 1863), and Meade’s cautious
pursuit of Lee after Gettysburg prompted Lincoln to promote Grant to
­general-in-chief of the Union army in early 1864. This change in command
 resulted in some of the bloodiest battles of the Eastern Theater. Grant’s
 Overland Campaign, including the Battle of the Wilderness, the Battle of
 Cold Harbor, and the siege of Petersburg, demonstrated Grant’s willing-
 ness to tirelessly attack the ever-dwindling Army of Northern Virginia. By
 June 1864, Grant’s army surrounded the Confederate city of Petersburg,
 Virginia. Siege operations cut off Confederate forces and supplies from
 the capital of Richmond. Meanwhile out west, Union armies under the
 command of William Tecumseh Sherman implemented hard war strate-
 gies and slowly made their way through central Tennessee and northern
 Georgia, capturing the vital rail hub of Atlanta in September 1864.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 9 2 chapt er 14




Pennsylvania              Action in both theaters during 1864 caused even more casualties and
Light Artillery,
Battery B, Peters-
                      furthered the devastation of disease. Disease haunted both armies, and
burg, Virginia.       accounted for over half of all Civil War casualties. Sometimes as many as
Photograph by         half of the men in a company could be sick. The overwhelming majority of
Timothy H.
O’Sullivan, 1864.     Civil War soldiers came from rural areas, where less exposure to diseases
The Metropolitan      meant soldiers lacked immunities. Vaccines for diseases such as smallpox
Museum of Art.
                      were largely unavailable to those outside cities or towns. Despite the com-
                      mon nineteenth-century tendency to see city men as weak or soft, soldiers
                      from urban environments tended to succumb to fewer diseases than their
                      rural counterparts. Tuberculosis, measles, rheumatism, typhoid, malaria,
                      and smallpox spread almost unchecked among the armies.
                          Civil War medicine focused almost exclusively on curing the patient
                      rather than preventing disease. Many soldiers attempted to cure them-
                      selves by concocting elixirs and medicines themselves. These ineffective
                      home remedies were often made from various plants the men found in
                      woods or fields. There was no understanding of germ theory, so many
                      soldiers did things that we would consider unsanitary today.29 They ate
                      food that was improperly cooked and handled, and they practiced what
                      we would consider poor personal hygiene. They did not take appropriate
                      steps to ensure that drinking water was free from bacteria. Diarrhea and
                      dysentery were common. These diseases were especially dangerous, as
                      Civil War soldiers did not understand the value of replacing fluids as they
                      were lost. As such, men affected by these conditions would weaken and
                      become unable to fight or march, and as they became dehydrated their
                      immune system became less effective, inviting other infections to attack
                      the body. Through trial and error soldiers began to protect themselves
                      from some of the more preventable sources of infection. Around 1862
                      both armies began to dig latrines rather than rely on the local waterways.

                © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  393


Burying human and animal waste also cut down on exposure to diseases
considerably.
     Medical surgery was limited and brutal. If a soldier was wounded in
the torso, throat, or head, there was little surgeons could do. Invasive
procedures to repair damaged organs or stem blood loss invariably re-
sulted in death. Luckily for soldiers, only approximately one in six com-
bat wounds were to one of those parts. The remaining were to limbs,
which was treatable by amputation. Soldiers had the highest chance of
survival if the limb was removed within forty-eight hours of injury. A
skilled surgeon could amputate a limb in three to five minutes from start
to finish. While the lack of germ theory again caused several unsafe prac-
tices, such as using the same tools on multiple patients, wiping hands on
filthy gowns, or placing hands in communal buckets of water, there is
evidence that amputation offered the best chance of survival.




Amputations were a common form of treatment during the war. While it saved the lives of some soldiers,
it was extremely painful and resulted in death in many cases. It also produced the first community of war
veterans without limbs in American history. Amputation being performed in a hospital tent, Gettysburg,
July 1863. National Archives and Records Administration.

           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 9 4 chapt er 14


            It is a common misconception that amputation was done without an-
        esthesia and against a patient’s wishes. Since the 1830s, Americans under-
        stood the benefits of nitrous oxide and ether in easing pain. ­Chloroform
        and opium were also used to either render patients unconscious or dull
        pain during the procedure. Also, surgeons would not amputate without
        the patient’s consent.
            In the Union army alone, 2.8 million ounces of opium and over 5.2 mil-
        lion opium pills were administered. In 1862, William Alexander Hammon
        was appointed Surgeon General for the United States. He sought to regu-
        late dosages and manage supplies of available medicines, both to prevent
        overdosing and to ensure that an ample supply remained for the next en-
        gagement. However, his guidelines tended to apply only to the regular
        federal army. Most Union soldiers were in volunteer units and organized
        at the state level. Their surgeons often ignored posted limits on medicines,
        or worse, experimented with their own concoctions made from local flora.
            In the North, the conditions in hospitals were somewhat superior.
        This was partly due to the organizational skills of women like Dorothea
        Dix, who was the Union’s Superintendent for Army Nurses. Addition-
        ally, many women were members of the United States Sanitary Commis-
        sion and helped to staff and supply hospitals in the North.
            Women took on key roles within hospitals both North and South. The
        publisher’s notice for Nurse and Spy in the Union Army states, “In the
        opinion of many, it is the privilege of woman to minister to the sick and
        soothe the sorrowing—and in the present crisis of our country’s history,
        to aid our brothers to the extent of her capacity.”30 Mary Chesnut wrote,
        “Every woman in the house is ready to rush into the Florence Nightingale
        business.”31 However, she indicated that after she visited the hospital, “I
        can never again shut out of view the sights that I saw there of human mis-
        ery. I sit thinking, shut my eyes, and see it all.”32 Hospital conditions were
        often so bad that many volunteer nurses quit soon after beginning. Kate
        Cumming volunteered as a nurse shortly after the war began. She, and
        other volunteers, traveled with the Army of Tennessee. However, all but
        one of the women who volunteered with Cumming quit within a week.
            Death came in many forms; disease, prisons, bullets, even lightning
        and bee stings took men slowly or suddenly. Their deaths, however, af-
        fected more than their regiments. Before the war, a wife expected to sit at
        her husband’s bed, holding his hand, and ministering to him after a long,
        fulfilling life. This type of death, “the Good Death,” changed during the
        Civil War as men died often far from home among strangers.33 Casualty
        reporting was inconsistent, so a woman was often at the mercy of the

  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  395


men who fought alongside her husband to learn not only the details of
his death but even that the death had occurred.
    “Now I’m a widow. Ah! That mournful word. Little the world think
of the agony it contains!” wrote Sally Randle Perry in her diary.34 After
her husband’s death at Sharpsburg, Sally received the label she would
share with more than two hundred thousand other women. The death of
a husband and loss of financial, physical, and emotional support could
shatter lives. It also had the perverse power to free women from bad
marriages and open doors to financial and psychological independence.
    Widows had an important role to play in the conflict. The ideal widow
wore black, mourned for a minimum of two and a half years, resigned her-
self to God’s will, focused on her children, devoted herself to her husband’s
memory, and brought his body home for burial. Many tried, but not all
widows were able to live up to the ideal. Many were unable to purchase
proper mourning garb. Black silk dresses, heavy veils, and other features
of antebellum mourning were expensive and in short supply. Because most
of these women were in their childbearing years, the war created an un-
precedented number of widows who were pregnant or still nursing infants.
In a time when the average woman gave birth to eight to ten children
in her lifetime, it is perhaps not surprising that the Civil War created so
many widows who were also young mothers with little free time for formal
mourning. Widowhood permeated American society. But in the end, it was
up to each widow to navigate her own mourning. She joined the ranks of
sisters, mothers, cousins, girlfriends, and communities in mourning men.35
    By the fall of 1864, military and social events played against the
backdrop of the presidential election of 1864. While the war raged on,
the presidential contest featured a transformed electorate. Three new
states (West Virginia, Nevada, and Kansas) had been added since 1860,
while the eleven states of the Confederacy did not participate. Lincoln
and his vice presidential nominee, Andrew Johnson (Tennessee), ran on
the National Union Party ticket. The main competition came from his
former commander, General George B. McClellan. Though McClellan
himself was a “War Democrat,” the official platform of the Democratic
Party in 1864 revolved around negotiating an immediate end to the Civil
War. McClellan’s vice presidential nominee was George H. Pendleton of
Ohio—a well-known Peace Democrat.
    On Election Day—November 8, 1864—Lincoln and McClellan each
needed 117 electoral votes (out of a possible 233) to win the presidency.
For much of the 1864 campaign season, Lincoln downplayed his chances
of reelection and McClellan assumed that large numbers of Union ­soldiers

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 9 6 chapt er 14


                      would grant him support. However, thanks in great part to William Sher-
                      man’s capture of Atlanta on September 2, 1864, and overwhelming sup-
                      port from Union troops, Lincoln won the election easily. Additionally,
                      Lincoln received support from more radical Republican factions and mem-
                      bers of the Radical Democracy Party that demanded the end of slavery.
                         In the popular vote, Lincoln defeated McClellan, 55.1 percent to 44.9
                      percent. In the Electoral College, Lincoln’s victory was even more pro-
                      nounced: 212 to 21. Lincoln won twenty-two states, and McClellan only
                      carried three: New Jersey, Delaware, and Kentucky.36
                         In the wake of his reelection, Abraham Lincoln delivered his second
                      inaugural address on March 4, 1865, in which he concluded:

                          With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right,
                          as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we
                          are in; to bind up the nation’s wounds; to care for him who shall have
                          borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan—to do all which may




With crowds of people filling every inch of ground around the U.S. Capitol, President Lincoln delivered his
inaugural address on March 4, 1865. Alexander Gardner, Lincoln’s Second Inaugural, between 1910 and
1920, from a photograph taken in 1865. Wikimedia.

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  397


   achieve and cherish a just, and a lasting peace, among ourselves, and with
   all nations.37

    The years 1864 and 1865 were the very definition of hard war. Incred-
ibly deadly for both sides, the Union campaigns in both the West and the
East destroyed Confederate infrastructure and demonstrated the efficacy
of the Union’s strategy. Following up on the successful capture of Atlanta,
William Sherman conducted his March to the Sea in the fall of 1864, ar-
riving in Savannah with time to capture it and deliver it as a Christmas
present for Abraham Lincoln. Sherman’s path of destruction took on an
even more destructive tone as he moved into the heart of the Confederacy
in South Carolina in early 1865. The burning of Columbia, South Caro-
lina, and subsequent capture of Charleston brought the hard hand of war
to the birthplace of secession. With Grant’s dogged pursuit of the Army of
Northern Virginia, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox Court House           Union soldiers
                                                                                pose in front of
on April 9, 1865, effectively ending major Confederate military operations.     the Appomattox
    To ensure the permanent legal end of slavery, Republicans drafted the       Court House after
                                                                                Lee’s surrender
Thirteenth Amendment during the war. Yet the end of legal slavery did           in April 1865.
not mean the end of racial injustice. During the war, ex-slaves were often      Wikimedia.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
3 9 8 chapt er 14


        segregated into disease-ridden contraband camps. After the war, the Re-
        publican Reconstruction program of guaranteeing black rights succumbed
        to persistent racism and southern white violence. Long after 1865, most
        black southerners continued to labor on plantations, albeit as nominally
        free tenants or sharecroppers, while facing public segregation and voting
        discrimination. The effects of slavery endured long after emancipation.


        V. Conclusion
        As battlefields fell silent in 1865, the question of secession had been an-
        swered, slavery had been eradicated, and America was once again territo-
        rially united. But in many ways, the conclusion of the Civil War created
        more questions than answers. How would the nation become one again?
        Who was responsible for rebuilding the South? What role would African
        Americans occupy in this society? Northern and southern soldiers re-
        turned home with broken bodies, broken spirits, and broken minds. Plan-
        tation owners had land but not labor. Recently freed African Americans
        had their labor but no land. Former slaves faced a world of ­possibilities—
        legal marriage, family reunions, employment, and fresh starts—but also
        a racist world of bitterness, violence, and limited opportunity. The war
        may have been over, but the battles for the peace were just beginning.


        VI. Reference Material
        This chapter was edited by Angela Esco Elder and David Thomson, with content
        contributions by Thomas Balcerski, William Black, Frank Cirillo, Matthew C.
        Hulbert, Andrew F. Lang, John Riley, Angela Riotto, Gregory N. Stern, David
        Thomson, Ann Tucker, and Rebecca Zimmer.
           Recommended citation: Thomas Balcerski et al., “The Civil War,” Angela
        Esco Elder and David Thomson, eds., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke
        and Ben Wright (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

        N o t e s t o C h a p t e r 14
            1. This most recent estimation of 750,000 wartime deaths was put forward
        by J. David Hacker, “A Census-Based Account of the Civil War Dead,” Civil War
        History 57, no. 4 (December 2011): 306–347.
            2. Proceedings of the Conventions at Charleston and Baltimore: Published
        by Order of the National Democratic Convention (Washington, DC: n.p., 1860).
            3. William J. Cooper, We Have the War upon Us: The Onset of the Civil War,
        November 1860–April 1861 (New York: Knopf, 2012), 14.
            4. “A Declaration of the Immediate Causes Which Induce and Justify the
        Secession of South Carolina from the Federal Union,” January 9, 1861, Ava-


  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  399


lon Project at the Yale Law School. http://​avalon​.law​.yale​.edu/​19th​_century/​csa​
_scarsec​.asp, accessed August 1, 2015.
     5. Alexander Stephens, speech in Savannah, Georgia, delivered March 21,
1861, quoted in Henry Cleveland, Alexander Stephens, in Public and Private.
With Letters and Speeches Before, During and Since the War (Philadelphia: Na-
tional, 1866), 719.
     6. “Declaration of the Immediate Causes.”
     7. See Jon L. Wakelyn, ed., Southern Unionist Pamphlets and the Civil War
(Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1999).
     8. Steven Hahn, The Political Worlds of Slavery and Freedom (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), 55–114.
     9. Horace Greeley, The American Conflict: A History of the Great Rebel-
lion in the United States of America, 1860–1864, Volume 1 (Hartford, CT: Case,
Lockwood, 1864), 366–367.
     10. Abraham Lincoln, “Inaugural Address,” March 4, 1861, Abraham Lin-
coln Papers, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
     11. Abraham Lincoln to Orville Browning, September 22, 1861, Abraham
Lincoln Papers, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
     12. Thomas H. O’Connor, Civil War Boston: Home Front and Battlefield
(Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1997), 67.
     13. Excerpt from Benj. F. Butler to Lieutenant Genl. Scott, 27 May 1861,
B-99 1861, Letters Received Irregular, Secretary of War, Record Group 107, Na-
tional Archives. http://​www​.freedmen​.umd​.edu/​Butler​.html.
     14. “THE SLAVE QUESTION.; Letter from Major-Gen. Butler on the Treat-
ment of Fugitive Slaves,” New York Times (August 6, 1861).
     15. Heather Cox Richardson, The Greatest Nation of the Earth: Republican
Economic Policies During the Civil War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1997).
     16. For literacy rates within the armies, see Bell Irvin Wiley, The Life of
Billy Yank: The Common Soldier of the Union (Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill,
1952), 304–306; and Bell Irvin Wiley, The Life of Johnny Reb: The Common
Soldier of the Confederacy (Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill, 1943), 335–337.
     17. For more on music in the Civil War, see Christian McWhirter, Battle
Hymns: The Power and Popularity of Music in the Civil War (Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 2012).
     18. Ethan S. Rafuse, McClellan’s War: The Failure of Moderation in the
Struggle for the Union (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005).
     19. Steven E. Woodworth, ed., The Shiloh Campaign (Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press, 2009).
     20. Glenn David Brasher, The Peninsula Campaign and the Necessity of
Emancipation: African Americans and the Fight for Freedom (Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 2012).
     21. Emancipation Proclamation, January 1, 1863, Presidential Proclama-
tions, 1791–1991, Record Group 11, General Records of the United States Gov-
ernment, National Archives, Washington, D.C.



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 0 0 chapt er 14


             22. Abraham Lincoln to Ulysses S. Grant, August 9, 1863, Abraham Lincoln
        Papers, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
             23. James Henry Gooding to Abraham Lincoln, September 28, 1863, Abra-
        ham Lincoln Papers, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
             24. James McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era (New
        York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 862.
             25. Quoted in Allen Guelzo, Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation: The End
        of Slavery in America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2004), 247.
             26. See Eugene C. Murdock, One Million Men: The Civil War Draft in the
        North (Madison: State Historical Society of Wisconsin, 1971).
             27. Laura Edwards, Scarlett Doesn’t Live Here Anymore: Southern Women
        in the Civil War Era (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2000), 85.
             28. Quoted in Heidi Schoof, Elizabeth Van Lew: Civil War Spy (Minneapo-
        lis, MN: Compass Books, 2006), 85.
             29. Shauna Devine, Learning from the Wounded: The Civil War and the Rise
        of American Medical Science (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
        2014), 70–71.
             30. S. Emma Edwards, Nurse and Spy in the Union Army: Comprising the
        Adventures and Experiences of a Woman in Hospitals, Camps, and Battle-Fields
        (Hartford, CT: Williams, 1865), 6.
             31. C. Vann Woodward, ed., Mary Chesnut’s Civil War (New Haven, CT:
        Yale University Press, 1981), 85.
             32. Ibid., 158.
             33. Drew Gilpin Faust, This Republic of Suffering: Death and the American
        Civil War (New York: Knopf, 2008).
             34. Sally Randle Perry, November 30, 1867, Sally Randle Perry Diary, 1867–
        1868, Alabama Department of Archives and History, Montgomery, Alabama.
             35. LeeAnn Whites, The Civil War as a Crisis in Gender: Augusta, Georgia,
        1860–1890 (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2000), 93–95.
             36. Presidential Elections, 1789–2008 (Washington, DC: CQ Press, 2010),
        135, 225.
             37. Abraham Lincoln, Second Inaugural Address; endorsed by Lincoln, April
        10, 1865, March 4, 1865, General Correspondence, 1837–1897, The Abraham
        Lincoln Papers, Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Washington, D.C.

        R e c o mm e n d e d R e a din g
        Ayers, Edward L. In the Presence of Mine Enemies: War in the Heart of America,
            1859–1863. New York: Norton, 2003.
        Berry, Stephen, ed. Weirding the War: Stories from the Civil War’s Ragged Edges.
            Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2011.
        Blight, David. Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory. Cam-
            bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.
        Brasher, Glenn David. The Peninsula Campaign and the Necessity of Emancipa-
            tion: African Americans and the Fight for Freedom. Chapel Hill: University
            of North Carolina Press, 2012.



  © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
           Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
T he C i v i l W a r  401


Clinton, Catherine, and Nina Silber, eds. Divided Houses: Gender and the Civil
    War. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Devine, Shauna. Learning from the Wounded: The Civil War and the Rise of Amer-
    ican Medical Science. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2014.
Fahs, Alice. The Imagined Civil War: Popular Literature of the North and South,
    1861–1865. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.
Faust, Drew Gilpin. This Republic of Suffering: Death and the American Civil
    War. New York: Knopf, 2008.
Foner, Eric. The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American Slavery. New York:
    Norton, 2011.
Gannon, Barbara A. The Won Cause: Black and White Comradeship in the
    Grand Army of the Republic. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
    2005.
Grimsley, Mark. The Hard Hand of War: Union Military Policy Towards South-
    ern Civilians, 1861–1865. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Hess, Earl. The Union Soldier in Battle: Enduring the Ordeal of Combat. Law-
    renceville: University Press of Kansas, 1997.
Hulbert, Matthew C. The Ghosts of Guerrilla Memory: How Civil War Bush-
    whackers Became Gunslingers in the American West. Athens: University of
    Georgia Press, 2016.
Janney, Caroline E. Remembering The Civil War: Reunion and the Limits of Rec-
    onciliation. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2013.
Jones, Howard. Blue and Gray Diplomacy: A History of Union and Confeder-
    ate Foreign Relations. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010.
Manning, Chandra. What This Cruel War Was Over: Soldiers, Slavery, and the
    Civil War. New York: Knopf, 2007.
McCurry, Stephanie. Confederate Reckoning: Power and Politics in the Civil
    War South. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012.
McPherson, James. Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. New York: Ox-
    ford University Press, 1988.
Meier, Kathryn Shively. Nature’s Civil War: Common Soldiers and the Environ-
    ment in 1862 Virginia. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2013.
Neely, Mark. The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties. New
    York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Nelson, Megan Kate. Ruin Nation: Destruction and the American Civil War.
    Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2012.
Rable, George C. God’s Almost Chosen Peoples: A Religious History of the
    American Civil War. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2015.
Richardson, Heather Cox. The Greatest Nation of the Earth: Republican Eco-
    nomic Policies During the Civil War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
    Press, 1997.
Vorenberg, Michael. The Civil War, the Abolition of Slavery, and the Thirteenth
    Amendment. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Whites, LeeAnn. The Civil War as a Crisis in Gender: Augusta, Georgia, 1860–
    1890. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2000.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
15
Reconstruction

I. Introduction
After the Civil War, much of the South lay in ruins. “It passes my com-       Contrabands,
                                                                              Cumberland
prehension to tell what became of our railroads,” one South Carolinian        Landing, Virginia,
told a northern reporter. “We had passably good roads, on which we            1862. Library of
could reach almost any part of the State, and the next week they were all     Congress.

gone—not simply broken up, but gone. Some of the material was burned,
I know, but miles and miles of iron have actually disappeared, gone out
of existence.”1 He might as well have been talking about the entire ante-
bellum way of life. The future of the South was uncertain. How would
these states be brought back into the Union? Would they be conquered
territories or equal states? How would they rebuild their governments,



             © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                      Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  403


economies, and social systems? What rights did freedom confer on for-
merly enslaved people?
    The answers to many of Reconstruction’s questions hinged on the
concepts of citizenship and equality. The era witnessed perhaps the most
open and widespread discussions of citizenship since the nation’s found-
ing. It was a moment of revolutionary possibility and violent backlash.
African Americans and Radical Republicans pushed the nation to finally
realize the Declaration of Independence’s promises that “all men are cre-
ated equal” and have “certain unalienable rights.” White Democrats
granted African Americans legal freedom but little more. When black
Americans and their radical allies succeeded in securing citizenship for
freedpeople, a new fight commenced to determine the legal, political, and
social implications of American citizenship. Resistance continued, and
Reconstruction eventually collapsed. In the South, limits on human free-
dom endured and would stand for nearly a century more.


II. Politics of Reconstruction
Reconstruction—the effort to restore southern states to the Union and to
redefine African Americans’ place in American society—began before the
Civil War ended. President Abraham Lincoln began planning for the reuni-
fication of the United States in the fall of 1863.2 With a sense that Union
victory was imminent and that he could turn the tide of the war by stoking
Unionist support in the Confederate states, Lincoln issued a proclamation
allowing southerners to take an oath of allegiance. When just 10 percent of
a state’s voting population had taken such an oath, loyal Unionists could
then establish governments.3 These so-called Lincoln governments sprang
up in pockets where Union support existed like Louisiana, Tennessee, and
Arkansas. Unsurprisingly, these were also the places that were exempted
from the liberating effects of the Emancipation Proclamation.
    Initially proposed as a war aim, Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclama-
tion committed the United States to the abolition of slavery. However,
the proclamation freed only slaves in areas of rebellion and left more
than seven hundred thousand in bondage in Delaware, Kentucky, Mary-
land, and Missouri as well as in Union-occupied areas of Louisiana, Ten-
nessee, and Virginia.
    To cement the abolition of slavery, Congress passed the Thirteenth
Amendment on January 31, 1865. The amendment legally abolished slav-
ery “except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
404                                                                                       chapte r 15




With the war coming to an end, the question of how to reunite the former Confederate states with the
Union was a divisive one. Lincoln’s Presidential Reconstruction plans were seen by many, including Radical
Republicans in Congress, to be too tolerant toward what they considered to be traitors. This political car-
toon reflects this viewpoint, showing Lincoln and Johnson happily stitching the Union back together with
little anger toward the South. Joseph E. Baker, The “Rail Splitter” at Work Repairing the Union, 1865.
Library of Congress.


                      duly convicted.” Section Two of the amendment granted Congress the
                      “power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.” State ratifica-
                      tion followed, and by the end of the year the requisite three fourths of the
                      states had approved the amendment, and four million people were forever
                      free from the slavery that had existed in North America for 250 years.4
                          Lincoln’s policy was lenient, conservative, and short-lived. Recon-
                      struction changed when John Wilkes Booth shot Lincoln on April 14,
                      1865, during a performance of Our American Cousin at Ford’s Theater.
                      Treated rapidly and with all possible care, Lincoln nevertheless suc-
                      cumbed to his wounds the following morning, leaving a somber pall over
                      the North and especially among African Americans.
                          The assassination of Abraham Lincoln propelled Vice President An-
                      drew Johnson into the executive office in April 1865. Johnson, a states’-

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  405


rights, strict-constructionist, and unapologetic racist from Tennessee,
offered southern states a quick restoration into the Union. His Recon-
struction plan required provisional southern governments to void their
ordinances of secession, repudiate their Confederate debts, and ratify the
Thirteenth Amendment. On all other matters, the conventions could do
what they wanted with no federal interference. He pardoned all south-
erners engaged in the rebellion with the exception of wealthy planters
who possessed more than $20,000 in property.5 The southern aristocracy
would have to appeal to Johnson for individual pardons. In the mean-
time, Johnson hoped that a new class of southerners would replace the
extremely wealthy in leadership positions.
    Many southern governments enacted legislation that reestablished
antebellum power relationships. South Carolina and Mississippi passed
laws known as Black Codes to regulate black behavior and impose social
and economic control. These laws granted some rights to African Ameri-
cans, like the right to own property, to marry, or to make contracts.
But they also denied fundamental rights. White lawmakers forbade black
men from serving on juries or in state militias, refused to recognize black
testimony against white people, apprenticed orphaned children to their
former masters, and established severe vagrancy laws. Mississippi’s va-
grant law required all freedmen to carry papers proving they had means
of employment.6 If they had no proof, they could be arrested and fined.
If they could not pay the fine, the sheriff had the right to hire out his
prisoner to anyone who was willing to pay the tax. Similar ambiguous
vagrancy laws throughout the South reasserted control over black labor
in what one scholar has called “slavery by another name.”7 Black codes
effectively criminalized black people’s leisure, limited their mobility, and
locked many into exploitative farming contracts. Attempts to restore the
antebellum economic order largely succeeded.
    These laws and outrageous mob violence against black southerners led
Republicans to call for a more dramatic Reconstruction. So when John-
son announced that the southern states had been restored, congressional
Republicans refused to seat delegates from the newly reconstructed states.
    Republicans in Congress responded with a spate of legislation aimed
at protecting freedmen and restructuring political relations in the South.
Many Republicans were keen to grant voting rights for freedmen in order
to build a new powerful voting bloc. Some Republicans, like U.S. con-
gressman Thaddeus Stevens, believed in racial equality, but the majority
were motivated primarily by the interest of their political party. The only
way to protect Republican interests in the South was to give the vote to

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
406                                                                                        chapte r 15




While no one could agree on what the best plan for reconstructing the nation would be, Americans
understood the moment as critical and perhaps revolutionary. In this magnificent visual metaphor for the
reconciliation of the North and South, John Lawrence postulates what might result from reunion. Recon-
struction, the print seems to argue, will form a more perfect Union that upholds the ideals of the American
Revolution, most importantly (as seen on a streaming banner near the top) that “All men are born free and
equal.” John Giles Lawrence, Reconstruction, 1867. Library of Congress.


                      the hundreds of thousands of black men. Republicans in Congress re-
                      sponded to the codes with the Civil Rights Act of 1866, the first federal
                      attempt to constitutionally define all American-born residents (except
                      Native peoples) as citizens. The law also prohibited any curtailment of
                      citizens’ “fundamental rights.”8
                          The Fourteenth Amendment developed concurrently with the Civil
                      Rights Act to ensure its constitutionality. The House of Representatives
                      approved the Fourteenth Amendment on June 13, 1866. Section One
                      granted citizenship and repealed the Taney Court’s infamous Dred Scott
                      (1857) decision. Moreover, it ensured that state laws could not deny due
                      process or discriminate against particular groups of people. The Four-
                      teenth Amendment signaled the federal government’s willingness to en-
                      force the Bill of Rights over the authority of the states.

               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  407


    Because he did not believe African Americans deserved equal rights,
President Johnson opposed the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment and
vetoed the Civil Rights Act. But after winning a two-thirds majority in the
1866 midterm elections, Republicans overrode the veto, and in 1867, they
passed the first Reconstruction Act, dissolving state governments and divid-
ing the South into five military districts. Under these new terms, states would
have to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment, write new constitutions enfran-
chising African Americans, and abolish repressive “black codes” before
rejoining the union. In the face of President Johnson’s repeated obstruction-
ism, the House of Representatives issued articles of impeachment against
the president. Although Johnson narrowly escaped conviction in the Senate,
Congress won the power to direct a new phase of Reconstruction. Six weeks
later, on July 9, 1868, the states ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, guar-
anteeing birthright citizenship and “equal protection of the laws.”
    In the 1868 presidential election, former Union General Ulysses S.
Grant ran on a platform that proclaimed, “Let Us Have Peace,” in which
he promised to protect the new status quo. On the other hand, the Demo-
cratic candidate, Horatio Seymour, promised to repeal Reconstruction.
Black southern voters helped Grant win most of the former Confederacy.




With the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment, droves of African American men went to the polls to
exercise their newly recognized right to vote. In this Harper’s Weekly print, black men of various occupa-
tions wait patiently for their turn as the first voter submits his ballot. Unlike other contemporary images
that depicted African Americans as ignorant, unkempt, and lazy, this print shows these black men as active
citizens. Alfred R. Waud, The First Vote, November 1867. Library of Congress.


           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
408                                                                       chapte r 15


                 Reconstruction brought the first moment of mass democratic partici-
             pation for African Americans. In 1860, only five states in the North al-
             lowed African Americans to vote on equal terms with whites. Yet after
             1867, when Congress ordered southern states to eliminate racial discrim-
             ination in voting, African Americans began to win elections across the
             South. In a short time, the South was transformed from an all-white,
             pro-slavery, Democratic stronghold to a collection of Republican-led
             states with African Americans in positions of power for the first time in
             American history.9
                 Through the provisions of the congressional Reconstruction Acts,
             black men voted in large numbers and also served as delegates to the
             state constitutional conventions in 1868. Black delegates actively par-
             ticipated in revising state constitutions. One of the most significant ac-
             complishments of these conventions was the establishment of a public
             school system. While public schools were virtually nonexistent in the an-
             tebellum period, by the end of Reconstruction, every southern state had
             established a public school system.10 Republican officials opened state
             institutions like mental asylums, hospitals, orphanages, and prisons to
             white and black residents, though often on a segregated basis. They ac-
             tively sought industrial development, northern investment, and internal
             improvements.
                 African Americans served at every level of government during Re-
             construction. At the federal level, Hiram Revels and Blanche K. Bruce
             were chosen as U.S. senators from Mississippi. Fourteen men served in
             the House of Representatives. At least 270 other African American men
             served in patronage positions as postmasters, customs officials, assessors,
             and ambassadors. At the state level, more than 1,000 African American
             men held offices in the South. P. B. S. Pinchback served as Louisiana’s
             governor for thirty-four days after the previous governor was suspended
             during impeachment proceedings and was the only African American
             state governor until Virginia elected L. Douglas Wilder in 1989. Almost
             800 African American men served as state legislators around the South,
             with African Americans at one time making up a majority in the South
             Carolina House of Representatives.11
                 African American officeholders came from diverse backgrounds.
             Many had been born free or had gained their freedom before the Civil
             War. Many free African Americans, particularly those in South Carolina,
             Virginia, and Louisiana, were wealthy and well educated, two facts that
             distinguished them from much of the white population both before and



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  409




The era of Reconstruction witnessed a few moments of true progress. One of those was the election of
African Americans to local, state, and national offices, including both houses of Congress. Pictured here are
Hiram Revels (the first African American senator) alongside six black representatives, all from the former
Confederate states. Currier & Ives, First Colored Senator and Representatives in the 41st and 42nd Con-
gress of the United States, 1872. Library of Congress.



after the Civil War. Some, like Antoine Dubuclet of Louisiana and Wil-
liam Breedlove from Virginia, owned slaves before the Civil War. Others
had helped slaves escape or taught them to read, like Georgia’s James D.
Porter.
    Most African American officeholders, however, gained their freedom
during the war. Among them were skilled craftsmen like Emanuel For-
tune, a shoemaker from Florida; ministers such as James D. Lynch from
Mississippi; and teachers like William V. Turner from Alabama. Moving
into political office was a natural continuation of the leadership roles
they had held in their former slave communities.
    By the end of Reconstruction in 1877, more than two thousand Afri-
can American men had served in offices ranging from local levee commis-
sioner to U.S. senator.12 When the end of Reconstruction returned white



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
410                                                                       chapte r 15


             Democrats to power in the South, all but a few African American office-
             holders lost their positions. After Reconstruction, African Americans did
             not enter the political arena again in large numbers until well into the
             twentieth century.


             III. The Meaning of Black Freedom
             Land was one of the major desires of the freed people. Frustrated by
             responsibility for the growing numbers of freed people following his
             troops, General William T. Sherman issued Special Field Order No. 15, in
             which land in Georgia and South Carolina was to be set aside as a home-
             stead for the freedpeople. Sherman lacked the authority to confiscate and
             distribute land, so this plan never fully took effect.13 One of the main
             purposes of the Freedmen’s Bureau, however, was to redistribute lands
             to former slaves that had been abandoned and confiscated by the federal
             government. Even these land grants were short-lived. In 1866, land that
             ex-Confederates had left behind was reinstated to them.
                 Freedpeople’s hopes of land reform were unceremoniously dashed as
             Freedmen’s Bureau agents held meetings with the freedmen throughout
             the South, telling them the promise of land was not going to be honored
             and that instead they should plan to go back to work for their former
             owners as wage laborers. The policy reversal came as quite a shock. In
             one instance, Freedmen’s Bureau commissioner General Oliver O. How-
             ard went to Edisto Island to inform the black population there of the
             policy change. The black commission’s response was that “we were
             promised Homesteads by the government. . . . You ask us to forgive the
             land owners of our island. . . .The man who tied me to a tree and gave me
             39 lashes and who stripped and flogged my mother and my sister . . . that
             man I cannot well forgive. Does it look as if he has forgiven me, seeing
             how he tries to keep me in a condition of helplessness?”14
                 In working to ensure that crops would be harvested, agents some-
             times coerced former slaves into signing contracts with their former mas-
             ters. However, the bureau also instituted courts where African Americans
             could seek redress if their employers were abusing them or not paying
             them. The last ember of hope for land redistribution was extinguished
             when Thaddeus Stevens and Charles Sumner’s proposed land reform bills
             were tabled in Congress. Radicalism had its limits, and the Republican
             Party’s commitment to economic stability eclipsed their interest in racial
             justice.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  411


    Another aspect of the pursuit of freedom was the reconstitution of
families. Many freedpeople immediately left plantations in search of fam-
ily members who had been sold away. Newspaper ads sought informa-
tion about long-lost relatives. People placed these ads until the turn of the
twentieth century, demonstrating the enduring pursuit of family reuni-
fication. Freedpeople sought to gain control over their own children or
other children who had been apprenticed to white masters either during
the war or as a result of the Black Codes. Above all, freedpeople wanted
freedom to control their families.15
    Many freedpeople rushed to solemnize unions with formal wedding
ceremonies. Black people’s desires to marry fit the government’s goal to
make free black men responsible for their own households and to prevent
black women and children from becoming dependent on the government.
    Freedpeople placed a great emphasis on education for their children
and themselves. For many, the ability to finally read the Bible for them-
selves induced work-weary men and women to spend all evening or
Sunday attending night school or Sunday school classes. It was not un-
common to find a one-room school with more than fifty students ranging
in age from three to eighty. As Booker T. Washington famously described
the situation, “it was a whole race trying to go to school. Few were too
young, and none too old, to make the attempt to learn.”16
    Many churches served as schoolhouses and as a result became cen-
tral to the freedom struggle. Free and freed black southerners carried
well-formed political and organizational skills into freedom. They devel-
oped anti-racist politics and organizational skills through antislavery or-
ganizations turned church associations. Liberated from white-controlled
churches, black Americans remade their religious worlds according to
their own social and spiritual desires.17
    One of the more marked transformations that took place after eman-
cipation was the proliferation of independent black churches and church
associations. In the 1930s, nearly 40 percent of 663 black churches
surveyed had their organizational roots in the post-emancipation era.18
Many independent black churches emerged in the rural areas, and most
of them had never been affiliated with white churches.
    Many of these independent churches were quickly organized into re-
gional, state, and even national associations, often by brigades of northern
and midwestern free blacks who went to the South to help the freedmen.
Through associations like the Virginia Baptist State Convention and the
Consolidated American Baptist Missionary Convention, Baptists became



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
412                                                                       chapte r 15


             the fastest growing post-emancipation denomination, building on their
             antislavery associational roots and carrying on the struggle for black po-
             litical participation.19
                  Tensions between northerners and southerners over styles of wor-
             ship and educational requirements strained these associations. Southern,
             rural black churches preferred worship services with more emphasis on
             inspired preaching, while northern urban blacks favored more orderly
             worship and an educated ministry.
                  Perhaps the most significant internal transformation in churches had
             to do with the role of women—a situation that eventually would lead to
             the development of independent women’s conventions in Baptist, Meth-
             odist, and Pentecostal churches. Women like Nannie Helen Burroughs
             and Virginia Broughton, leaders of the Baptist Woman’s Convention,
             worked to protect black women from sexual violence from white men.
             Black representatives repeatedly articulated this concern in state consti-
             tutional conventions early in the Reconstruction era. In churches, women
             continued to fight for equal treatment and access to the pulpit as preach-
             ers, even though they were able to vote in church meetings.20
                  Black churches provided centralized leadership and organization in
             post-emancipation communities. Many political leaders and officehold-
             ers were ministers. Churches were often the largest building in town and
             served as community centers. Access to pulpits and growing congrega-
             tions provided a foundation for ministers’ political leadership. Groups
             like the Union League, militias, and fraternal organizations all used the
             regalia, ritual, and even hymns of churches to inform and shape their
             practice.
                  Black churches provided space for conflict over gender roles, cultural
             values, practices, norms, and political engagement. With the rise of Jim
             Crow, black churches would enter a new phase of negotiating relation-
             ships within the community and the wider world.


             IV. Reconstruction and Women
             Reconstruction involved more than the meaning of emancipation.
             Women also sought to redefine their roles within the nation and in their
             local communities. The abolitionist and women’s rights movements si-
             multaneously converged and began to clash. In the South, both black and
             white women struggled to make sense of a world of death and change. In
             Reconstruction, leading women’s rights advocate Elizabeth Cady Stanton



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton maintained a strong and productive relationship for nearly
half a century as they sought to secure political rights for women. While the fight for women’s rights stalled
during the war, it sprung back to life as Anthony, Stanton, and others formed the American Equal Rights
Association. [Elizabeth Cady Stanton, seated, and Susan B. Anthony, standing, three-quarter length por-
trait], between 1880 and 1902. Library of Congress.



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
414                                                                       chapte r 15


             saw an unprecedented opportunity for disenfranchised groups. Women
             as well as black Americans, North and South, could seize political rights.
             Stanton formed the Women’s Loyal National League in 1863, which pe-
             titioned Congress for a constitutional amendment abolishing slavery.21
             The Thirteenth Amendment marked a victory not only for the antislav-
             ery cause but also for the Loyal League, proving women’s political ef-
             ficacy and the possibility for radical change. Now, as Congress debated
             the meanings of freedom, equality, and citizenship for former slaves,
             women’s rights leaders saw an opening to advance transformations in
             women’s status, too. On May 10, 1866, just one year after the war, the
             Eleventh National Women’s Rights Convention met in New York City to
             discuss what many agreed was an extraordinary moment, full of prom-
             ise for fundamental social change. Elizabeth Cady Stanton presided over
             the meeting. Also in attendance were prominent abolitionists with whom
             Stanton and other women’s rights leaders had joined forces in the years
             leading up to the war. Addressing this crowd of social reformers, Stanton
             captured the radical spirit of the hour: “now in the reconstruction,” she
             declared, “is the opportunity, perhaps for the century, to base our gov-
             ernment on the broad principle of equal rights for all.”22 Stanton chose
             her universal language—“equal rights for all”—with intention, setting
             an agenda of universal suffrage. Thus, in 1866, the National Women’s
             Rights Convention officially merged with the American Anti-Slavery So-
             ciety to form the American Equal Rights Association (AERA). This union
             marked the culmination of the long-standing partnership between aboli-
             tionists and women’s rights advocates.
                  The AERA was split over whether black male suffrage should take
             precedence over universal suffrage, given the political climate of the
             South. Some worried that political support for freedmen would be under-
             mined by the pursuit of women’s suffrage. For example, AERA member
             Frederick Douglass insisted that the ballot was literally a “question of
             life and death” for southern black men, but not for women.23 Some Afri-
             can American women challenged white suffragists in other ways. Frances
             Harper, for example, a freeborn black woman living in Ohio, urged them
             to consider their own privilege as white and middle class. Universal suf-
             frage, she argued, would not so clearly address the complex difficulties
             posed by racial, economic, and gender inequality.24
                  These divisions came to a head early in 1867, as the AERA organized
             a campaign in Kansas to determine the fate of black and woman suf-
             frage. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and her partner in the movement, Susan B.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  415




                                                  Elizabeth Cady Stanton, the great women’s rights
                                                  and abolition activist, was one of the strongest
                                                  forces in the universal suffrage movement. Her
                                                  name can be seen at the top of this petition to
                                                  extend suffrage to all regardless of sex, which was
                                                  presented to Congress on January 29, 1866. It did
                                                  not pass, and women would not gain the vote for
                                                  more than half a century after Stanton and others
                                                  signed this petition. Petition of E. Cady Stanton,
                                                  Susan B. Anthony, Lucy Stone, Antoinette Brown
                                                  Blackwell, and Others Asking for an Amendment
                                                  of the Constitution that Shall Prohibit the Several
                                                  States from Disfranchising Any of Their Citizens on
                                                  the Ground of Sex, 1865. National Archives and
                                                  Records Administration.



­ nthony, made the journey to advocate universal suffrage. Yet they soon
A
realized that their allies were distancing themselves from women’s suf-
frage in order to advance black enfranchisement. Disheartened, Stan-
ton and Anthony allied instead with white supremacists who supported
women’s equality. Many fellow activists were dismayed by Stanton’s and
Anthony’s willingness to appeal to racism to advance their cause.25
    These tensions finally erupted over conflicting views of the Fourteenth
and Fifteenth Amendments. Women’s rights leaders vigorously protested
the Fourteenth Amendment. Although it established national citizenship
for all persons born or naturalized in the United States, the amendment
also introduced the word male into the Constitution for the first time. After
the Fifteenth Amendment ignored sex as an unlawful barrier to suffrage,
an omission that appalled Stanton, the AERA officially dissolved. Stanton
and Anthony formed the National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA),
while suffragists who supported the Fifteenth Amendment, regardless of its
limitations, founded the American Woman Suffrage Association (AWSA).


         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
416                                                                       chapte r 15


                 The NWSA soon rallied around a new strategy: the New Departure.
             This new approach interpreted the Constitution as already guaranteeing
             women the right to vote. They argued that by nationalizing citizenship
             for all people and protecting all rights of citizens—including the right
             to vote—the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments guaranteed wom-
             en’s suffrage. Broadcasting the New Departure, the NWSA encouraged
             women to register to vote, which roughly seven hundred did between
             1868 and 1872. Susan B. Anthony was one of them and was arrested but
             then acquitted in trial. In 1875, the Supreme Court addressed this consti-
             tutional argument: acknowledging women’s citizenship but arguing that
             suffrage was not a right guaranteed to all citizens. This ruling not only
             defeated the New Departure but also coincided with the Court’s broader
             reactionary interpretation of the Reconstruction amendments that sig-
             nificantly limited freedmen’s rights. Following this defeat, many suffrag-
             ists like Stanton increasingly replaced the ideal of universal suffrage with
             arguments about the virtue that white women would bring to the polls.
             These new arguments often hinged on racism and declared the necessity
             of white women voters to keep black men in check.26
                 Advocates for women’s suffrage were largely confined to the North,
             but southern women were experiencing social transformations as well.
             The lines between refined white womanhood and degraded enslaved
             black femaleness were no longer so clearly defined. Moreover, during the
             war, southern white women had been called on to do traditional men’s
             work, chopping wood and managing businesses. While white southern
             women decided whether and how to return to their prior status, Af-
             rican American women embraced new freedoms and a redefinition of
             womanhood.
                 The Civil War showed white women, especially upper-class women,
             life without their husbands’ protection. Many did not like what they
             saw, especially given the possibility of racial equality. Formerly wealthy
             women hoped to maintain their social status by rebuilding the prewar
             social hierarchy. Through Ladies’ Memorial Associations and other civic
             groups, southern women led the efforts to bury and memorialize the
             dead, praising and bolstering their men’s masculinity through nationalist
             speeches and memorials. Ladies’ Memorial Associations (LMAs) grew
             out of the Soldiers’ Aid Society and became the precursor and custodian
             of the Lost Cause narrative. Proponents of the Lost Cause tried to rewrite
             the history of the antebellum South to deemphasize the brutality of slav-
             ery. They also created the myth that the Civil War was fought over states’
             rights instead of slavery, which was the actual cause. LMAs and their

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  417




                                                 The Fifteenth Amendment prohibited discrimina-
                                                 tion in voting rights on the basis of race, color, or
                                                 previous status (i.e., slavery). While the amendment
                                                 was not all encompassing in that women were not
                                                 included, it was an extremely significant ruling in
                                                 affirming the liberties of African American men.
                                                 This print depicts a huge parade held in Balti-
                                                 more, Maryland, on May 19, 1870, surrounded
                                                 by portraits of abolitionists and scenes of African
                                                 Americans exercising their rights. Thomas Kelly
                                                 after James C. Beard, The 15th Amendment. Cel-
                                                 ebrated May 19th 1870, 1870. Library of Congress.


ceremonies created new holidays during which white southerners could
reaffirm their allegiance to the Confederacy and express their opposition
to black rights. For instance, some LMAs celebrated the anniversary of
Stonewall Jackson’s death on May 10.27 Through these activities, south-
ern women took on political roles in the South.
    Southern black women also sought to redefine their public and pri-
vate lives. Their efforts to control their labor met the immediate opposi-
tion of southern white women. Gertrude Clanton, a plantation mistress
before the war, disliked cooking and washing dishes, so she hired an Af-
rican American woman to do the washing. A misunderstanding quickly
developed. The laundress, nameless in Gertrude’s records, performed her
job and returned home. Gertrude believed that her money had purchased
a day’s labor, not just the load of washing, and she became quite frus-
trated. Meanwhile, this washerwoman and others like her set wages and
hours for themselves, and in many cases began to take washing into their
own homes in order to avoid the surveillance of white women and the
sexual threat posed by white men.28
    Similar conflicts raged across the South. White southerners demanded
that African American women work in the plantation home and insti-
tuted apprenticeship systems to place African American children in un-
paid labor positions. African American women combated these attempts
by refusing to work at jobs without fair pay or fair conditions and by
clinging tightly to their children.
    Like white LMA members, African American women formed clubs
to bury their dead, to celebrate African American masculinity, and to
provide aid to their communities. On May 1, 1865, African Americans
in Charleston created the precursor to the modern Memorial Day by
mourning the Union dead buried hastily on a race track turned prison.29

         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
418                                                                       chapte r 15


             Like their white counterparts, the three hundred African American
             women who participated had been members of the local Patriotic As-
             sociation, which aided freedpeople during the war. African American
             women continued participating in federal Decoration Day ceremonies
             and, later, formed their own club organizations. Racial violence, whether
             city riots or rural vigilantes, continued to threaten these vulnerable
             households. Nevertheless, the formation and preservation of African
             American households became a paramount goal for African American
             women.
                  For all of their differences, white and black southern women faced a
             similar challenge during Reconstruction. Southern women celebrated the
             return of their brothers, husbands, and sons, but couples separated for
             many years struggled to adjust. To make matters worse, many of these
             former soldiers returned with physical or mental wounds. For white fam-
             ilies, suicide and divorce became more acceptable, while the opposite oc-
             curred for black families. Since the entire South suffered from economic
             devastation, many families were impoverished and sank into debt. All
             southern women faced economic devastation, lasting wartime trauma,
             and enduring racial tensions.


             V. Racial Violence in Reconstruction
             Violence shattered the dream of biracial democracy. Still steeped in the
             violence of slavery, white southerners could scarcely imagine black free
             labor. Congressional investigator Carl Schurz reported that in the sum-
             mer of 1865, southerners shared a near unanimous sentiment that “You
             cannot make the negro work, without physical compulsion.”30 Violence
             had been used in the antebellum period to enforce slave labor and to de-
             fine racial difference. In the post-emancipation period it was used to stifle
             black advancement and return to the old order.
                 Much of life in the antebellum South had been premised on slavery.
             The social order rested on a subjugated underclass, and the labor system
             required unfree laborers. A notion of white supremacy and black inferi-
             ority undergirded it all. Whites were understood as fit for freedom and
             citizenship, blacks for chattel slave labor. The Confederate surrender at
             Appomattox Court House and the subsequent adoption by the U.S. Con-
             gress of the Thirteenth Amendment destroyed the institution of Ameri-
             can slavery and threw southern society into disarray. The foundation of
             southern society had been shaken, but southern whites used black codes
             and racial terrorism to reassert control of former slaves.

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  419




The Ku Klux Klan was just one of a number of vigilante groups that arose after the war to terrorize African
Americans and Republicans throughout the South. The KKK brought violence into the voting polls, the
workplace, and—as seen in this Harper’s Weekly print—the homes of black Americans. Frank Bellew, Visit
of the Ku-Klux, 1872. Wikimedia.



    Racial violence in the Reconstruction period took three major forms:
riots against black political authority, interpersonal fights, and organized
vigilante groups. There were riots in southern cities several times during
Reconstruction. The most notable were the riots in Memphis and New
Orleans in 1866, but other large-scale urban conflicts erupted in places
including Laurens, South Carolina, in 1870; Colfax, Louisiana, in 1873;
another in New Orleans in 1874; Yazoo City, Mississippi, in 1875; and
Hamburg, South Carolina, in 1876. southern cities grew rapidly after the
war as migrants from the countryside—particularly freed slaves—flocked
to urban centers. Cities became centers of Republican control. But white
conservatives chafed at the influx of black residents and the establishment
of biracial politics. In nearly every conflict, white conservatives initiated
violence in reaction to Republican rallies or conventions or elections in
which black men were to vote. The death tolls of these conflicts remain
incalculable, and victims were overwhelmingly black.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
420                                                                       chapte r 15


                  Even everyday violence between individuals disproportionally tar-
             geted African Americans during Reconstruction. African Americans
             gained citizenship rights like the ability to serve on juries as a result of
             the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and the Fourteenth Amendment. But south-
             ern white men were almost never prosecuted for violence against black
             victims. White men beat or shot black men with relative impunity, and
             did so over minor squabbles, labor disputes, long-standing grudges, and
             crimes of passion. These incidents sometimes were reported to local fed-
             eral authorities like the army or the Freedmen’s Bureau, but more often
             than not such violence was unreported and unprosecuted.31
                  The violence committed by organized vigilante groups, sometimes
             called nightriders or bushwhackers, was more often premeditated.
             Groups of nightriders operated under cover of darkness and wore dis-
             guises to curtail black political involvement. Nightriders harassed and
             killed black candidates and officeholders and frightened voters away
             from the polls. They also aimed to limit black economic mobility by ter-
             rorizing freedpeople who tried to purchase land or otherwise become
             too independent from the white masters they used to rely on. They were
             terrorists and vigilantes, determined to stop the erosion of the antebellum
             South, and they were widespread and numerous, operating throughout
             the South. The Ku Klux Klan emerged in the late 1860s as the most infa-
             mous of these groups.
                  The Ku Klux Klan (KKK) was organized in 1866 in Pulaski, Tennes-
             see, and had spread to nearly every state of the former Confederacy by
             1868. The Klan drew heavily from the antebellum southern elite, but
             Klan groups sometimes overlapped with criminal gangs or former Con-
             federate guerrilla groups. The Klan’s reputation became so potent, and its
             violence so widespread, that many groups not formally associated with
             it were called Ku Kluxers, and to “Ku Klux” meant to commit vigilante
             violence. While it is difficult to differentiate Klan actions from those of
             similar groups, such as the White Line, the Knights of the White Camel-
             lia, and the White Brotherhood, the distinctions hardly matter. All such
             groups were part of a web of terror that spread throughout the South
             during Reconstruction. In Panola County, Mississippi, between August
             1870 and December 1872, twenty-four Klan-style murders occurred. And
             nearby, in Lafayette County, Klansmen drowned thirty black Mississip-
             pians in a single mass murder. Sometimes the violence was aimed at black
             men or women who had tried to buy land or dared to be insolent toward
             a white southerner. Other times, as with the beating of Republican sheriff



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  421


and tax collector Allen Huggins, the Klan targeted white politicians who
supported freedpeople’s civil rights. Numerous Republican politicians,
perhaps dozens, were killed, either while in office or while campaigning.
Thousands of individual citizens, men and women, white and black, had
their homes raided and were whipped, raped, or murdered.32
    The federal government responded to southern paramilitary tactics
by passing the Enforcement Acts between 1870 and 1871. The acts made
it criminal to deprive African Americans of their civil rights. The acts
also deemed violent Klan behavior as acts of rebellion against the United
States and allowed for the use of U.S. troops to protect freedpeople. For
a time, the federal government, its courts, and its troops, sought to put
an end to the KKK and related groups. But the violence continued. By
1876, as southern Democrats reestablished “home rule” and “redeemed”
the South from Republicans, federal opposition to the KKK weakened.




The federal government created the Freedmen’s Bureau to assist freed people in securing their rights and
their livelihoods. In this Harper’s Weekly print, The Freedmen’s Bureau official protecting the black men
and women from the angry and riotous mob of white Americans stood as a representation of the entire
bureau. Soon the bureau and the federal government would recognize that they could not accomplish a
fraction of what they set out to do, including keeping African Americans safe and free in the South. Alfred
R. Waud, The Freedmen’s Bureau, 1868. Library of Congress.



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
422                                                                       chapte r 15


             National attention shifted away from the South and the activities of the
             Klan, but African Americans remained trapped in a world of white su-
             premacy that restricted their economic, social, and political rights.
                 White conservatives would assert that Republicans, in denouncing
             violence, were “waving a bloody shirt” for political opportunity. The
             violence, according to many white conservatives, was fabricated, or not
             as bad as it was claimed, or an unavoidable consequence of the enfran-
             chisement of African Americans. On December 22, 1871, R. Latham of
             Yorkville, South Carolina, wrote to the New York Tribune, voicing the
             beliefs of many white southerners as he declared that “the same principle
             that prompted the white men at Boston, disguised as Indians, to board,
             during the darkness of night, a vessel with tea, and throw her cargo into
             the Bay, clothed some of our people in Ku Klux gowns, and sent them out
             on missions technically illegal. Did the Ku Klux do wrong? You are ready
             to say they did and we will not argue the point with you. . . . Under the
             peculiar circumstances what could the people of South Carolina do but
             resort to Ku Kluxing?”33
                 Victims and witnesses to the violence told a different story. Sallie Ad-
             kins of Warren County, Georgia, was traveling with her husband, Joseph,
             a Georgia state senator, when he was assassinated by Klansmen on May
             10, 1869. She wrote President Ulysses S. Grant, asking for both physical
             protection and justice. “I am no Statesman,” she disclaimed; “I am only
             a poor woman whose husband has been murdered for his devotion to his
             country. I may have very foolish ideas of Government, States & Consti-
             tutions. But I feel that I have claims upon my country. The Rebels impris-
             oned my Husband. Pardoned Rebels murdered him. There is no law for
             the punishment of them who do deeds of this sort. . . . I demand that you,
             President Grant, keep the pledge you made the nation—make it safe for
             any man to utter boldly and openly his devotion to the United States.”34
                 The political and social consequences of the violence were as lasting
             as the physical and mental trauma suffered by victims and witnesses. Ter-
             rorism worked to end federal involvement in Reconstruction and helped
             to usher in a new era of racial repression.
                 African Americans actively sought ways to shed the vestiges of slav-
             ery. Many discarded the names their former masters had chosen for them
             and adopted new names like “Freeman” and “Lincoln” that affirmed
             their new identities as free citizens. Others resettled far from their former
             plantations, hoping to eventually farm their own land or run their own
             businesses. By the end of Reconstruction, the desire for self-definition,



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  423


economic independence, and racial pride coalesced in the founding of
dozens of black towns across the South. Perhaps the most well-known
of these towns was Mound Bayou, Mississippi, a Delta town established
in 1887 by Isaiah Montgomery and Ben Green, former slaves of Joseph
and Jefferson Davis. Residents of the town took pride in the fact that
African Americans owned all of the property in town, including banks,
insurance companies, shops, and the surrounding farms. The town cel-
ebrated African American cultural and economic achievements during
their annual festival, Mound Bayou Days. These tight-knit communities
provided African Americans with spaces where they could live free from
the indignities of segregation and the exploitation of sharecropping on
white-owned plantations.35


VI. Economic Development During
the Civil War and Reconstruction                                               George N.
                                                                               Barnard, City
                                                                               of Atlanta, Ga.,
The Civil War destroyed and then transformed the American economy.             no. 1, c. 1866. Li-
In 1859 and 1860, wealthy southern planters were flush after ­producing        brary of Congress.




         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
424                                                                       chapte r 15


             record cotton crops. Southern prosperity relied on over four million Afri-
             can American slaves to grow cotton, along with a number of other staple
             crops across the region. Cotton fed the textile mills of America and Europe
             and brought great wealth to the region. On the eve of war, the American
             South enjoyed more per capita wealth than any other slave economy in the
             New World. To their masters, slaves constituted their most valuable assets,
             worth roughly $3 billion.36 Yet this wealth obscured the gains in infra-
             structure, industrial production, and financial markets that occurred north
             of the Mason-Dixon Line, a fact that the war would unmask for all to see.
                 In contrast to the slave South, northerners praised their region as a
             land of free labor, populated by farmers, merchants, and wage laborers. It
             was also home to a robust market economy. By 1860, northerners could
             buy clothing made in a New England factory, or light their homes with
             kerosene oil from Pennsylvania. The Midwest produced seas of grain
             that fed the country, with enough left over for export to Europe. Farther
             west, mining and agriculture were the mainstays of life. Along with the
             textile mills, shoe factories, and iron foundries, the firms that produced
             McCormick’s wheat harvesters and Colt’s firearms displayed the tech-
             nical advances of northern manufacturers. Their goods crisscrossed the
             country on the North’s growing railroad network. An extensive network
             of banks and financial markets helped aggregate capital that could be
             reinvested into further growth.
                 The Civil War, like all wars, interrupted the rhythms of commer-
             cial life by destroying lives and property. This was especially true in the
             South. From 1861 onward, the Confederate government struggled to
             find the guns, food, and supplies needed to field an army. Southerners
             did make astonishing gains in industrial production during this time, but
             it was never enough. The Union’s blockade of the Atlantic prevented
             the Confederacy from financing the war with cotton sales to Europe. To
             pay their troops and keep the economy alive, the Confederate Congress
             turned to printing paper money that quickly sank in value and led to
             rapid inflation. In many cases, Confederate officials dispensed with taxes
             paid in cash and simply impressed the food and materials needed from
             their citizens. Perhaps most striking of all, in the vast agricultural wealth
             of the South, many southerners struggled to find enough to eat.
                 The war also pushed the U.S. government to take unprecedented
             steps. Congress raised tariffs and passed the first national income tax
             in 1862. In late 1861, Congress created the nation’s first fiat currency,
             called greenbacks. At first, the expansion of the currency and the rapid
             rise in government spending created an uptick in business in 1862–1863.

       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  425


As the war dragged on, inflation also hit the North. Workers demanded
higher wages to pay rents and buy necessities, while the business com-
munity groaned under their growing tax burden. The United States, how-
ever, never embarked on a policy of impressment for food and supplies.
The factories and farms of the North successfully supplied Union troops,
while the federal government, with some adjustments, found the means
to pay for war. None of this is to suggest that the North’s superior ability
to supply its war machine made the outcome of the war inevitable. Any
account of the war must consider the tangled web of politics, battles, and
economics that occurred between 1861 and 1865. But the aftermath of
the war left portions of the Confederacy in ruins. State governments were
mired in debt. White planters had most of their capital tied up in slaves,
and so lost most of their wealth. Cotton remained the most significant
crop, but the war changed how it was grown and sold. Planters broke up
large farms into smaller plots tended by single families in exchange for a
portion of the crop, a system called sharecropping. Once cotton produc-
tion resumed, Americans found that their cotton now competed with
new cotton plantations around the world. For the South as a whole, the
war and Reconstruction marked the start of a period of deep poverty that
would last until at least the New Deal of the 1930s.




War brought destruction across the South. Governmental and private buildings, communication systems,
the economy, and transportation infrastructure were all debilitated. Richmond, Va. Crippled locomotive,
Richmond & Petersburg Railroad depot, c. 1865. Library of Congress.

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
426                                                                               chapte r 15


                         Emancipation was the single most important economic, social, and
                     political outcome of the war. Freedom empowered African Americans in
                     the South to rebuild families, make contracts, hold property, and move
                     freely for the first time. Republicans in the South attempted to transform
                     the region into a free-labor economy like the North. Yet the transition
                     from slave labor to free labor was never so clear. Well into the twenti-
                     eth century, white southerners used a combination of legal coercion and
                     extralegal violence to maintain systems of bound labor. Vagrancy laws
                     enabled law enforcement to justify the arrest of innocent black men and
                     women, and the convict-lease system meant that arbitrary arrests often
                     resulted in decades of forced, uncompensated labor. But this new form
Massachusetts
Agricultural Col-    of servitude, which continued until World War II, was only the most ex-
lege (now known      treme example of an array of economic injustices. In the later nineteenth
as University of
Massachusetts
                     century, poor whites would form mobs and go “white-capping” to scare
Amherst) was one     away black job seekers.37 Lacking the means to buy their own farms,
of many colleges
                     black farmers often turned to sharecropping. Sharecropping often led to
founded through
the Federal          cycles of debt that kept families bound to the land.38
Morrill-Land             Victory did not produce a sudden economic boom for the rest of the
Grant Colleges
Act. Massachu-       United States, either. The North would not regain its prewar pace of
setts Agricultural   industrial and commodity output until the 1870s. But the war did prove
College, Amherst,
Mass. 1879, 1880.
                     beneficial to wealthy northern farmers who could afford new technolo-
Wikimedia.           gies. Wartime labor shortages promoted the use of mechanical reapers,




               © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                        Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  427


reducing demand for labor, boosting farm yields, and sowing the seeds
of inequality.
    Wartime laws also transformed the relationship between the federal
government and the American economy. New tariff laws sheltered north-
ern industry from European competition. The Morrill Land Grant helped
create colleges such as the University of California, the University of Il-
linois, and the University of Wisconsin. With the creation of the national
banking system and greenbacks, Congress replaced hundreds of state
bank notes with a system of federal currency that accelerated trade and
exchange. This was not to say that Republican policy worked for every-
one. The Homestead Act, meant to open the West to small farmers, was
often frustrated by railroad corporations and speculators. The Transcon-
tinental Railroad, launched during the war, failed to produce substantial
economic gains for years.
    The war years forged a close relationship between government and
the business elite, a relationship that sometimes resulted in corruption
and catastrophe, as it did when markets crashed on Black Friday, Sep-
tember 24, 1869. This new relationship created a political backlash, es-
pecially in the West and South, against Washington’s perceived eastern
and industrial bias. Conflicts over emancipation and civil rights quickly
gave way to long political conflict over the direction of American eco-
nomic development.


VII. The End of Reconstruction
Reconstruction ended when northerners abandoned the cause of former
slaves and Democrats recaptured southern politics. Between 1868 and
1877, and especially after the Depression of 1873, economic issues sup-
planted Reconstruction as the foremost issue on the national agenda. The
biggest threat to Republican power in the South had been the violence
and intimidation of white Democrats. Only the presence of federal troops
in key southern cities prevented Reconstruction’s quick collapse. But the
United States never committed the personnel required to restore order
and guarantee black southerners the rights promised by the Fourteenth
Amendment.
    Republicans and Democrats responded to economic uncertainty by
retreating from Reconstruction. War-weary from a decade of military
and political strife, so-called Stalwart Republicans turned from the ideal-
ism of civil rights to the practicality of economics and party politics. They



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
428                                                                       chapte r 15


             won particular influence during Ulysses S. Grant’s first term as president
             (1868–1872). By the early 1870s, Stalwart Republicans assumed control
             of Republican Party politics.
                 Meanwhile, New Departure Democrats—who focused on business,
             economics, political corruption, and trade—gained strength by distanc-
             ing themselves from pro-slavery Democrats and Copperheads. In the
             South, they were called Redeemers. White southerners initially opposed
             the Redeemers and instead clung tightly to white supremacy and the
             Confederacy, but between 1869 and 1871, the Redeemers won support
             from white southerners by promising local rule by white Democrats,
             rather than black or white Republicans. By 1871, Redeemers won politi-
             cal control and ended Reconstruction in three important states: Tennes-
             see, Virginia, and Georgia.
                 In September 1873, Jay Cooke and Company declared bankruptcy,
             resulting in a bank run that spiraled into a six-year depression. The De-
             pression of 1873 crushed the nation’s already suffering laboring class
             and destroyed whatever remaining idealism northerners had about Re-
             construction. In the South, where many farms were capitalized entirely
             through loans, sources of credit vanished, many landowners defaulted,
             and farmers entered an already oversaturated labor market. Wages plum-
             meted and a growing system of debt peonage trapped workers in endless
             cycles of poverty. The economic turmoil enabled the Democrats to take
             control of the House of Representatives after the 1874 elections, blunting
             the legislature’s capacity to any longer direct Reconstruction.
                 On the eve of the 1876 presidential election, the nation still reeled
             from depression. Scandals sapped trust in the Grant Administration. By
             1875, Democrats in Mississippi hatched the Mississippi Plan, a wave of
             violence designed to intimidate black activists and suppress black vot-
             ers.39 The state’s Republican governor pleaded for federal intervention,
             but national Republicans ignored the plea. Meanwhile, Rutherford B.
             Hayes, a Republican, won a landslide victory in the Ohio gubernatorial
             election without mentioning Reconstruction, focusing instead on fight-
             ing corruption and alcohol abuse and promoting economic recovery. His
             success made him a potential presidential candidate. The stage was set
             for an election that would end Reconstruction as a national issue.
                 Republicans chose Rutherford B. Hayes as their nominee; Demo-
             crats chose Samuel J. Tilden, who ran on honest politics and home rule
             in the South. Florida, Louisiana, and South Carolina would determine
             the president. Despite the enduring presence of Reconstruction in those



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  429




During the Panic of 1873, workers began demanding that the federal government help alleviate the strain
on Americans. In January 1874, over seven thousand protesters congregated in New York City’s Tompkins
Square to insist that the government make job creation a priority. They were met with brutality as police
dispersed the crowd, and consequently the unemployment movement lost much of its steam. Matt Morgen,
Print of a crowd driven from Tompkins Square by the mounted police, in the Tompkins Square Riot of
1874, January 1874. Wikimedia.



states, white conservatives organized violence and fraud with impunity.
With the election results contested, a federal special electoral commis-
sion voted along party lines—eight Republicans for, seven Democrats
against—in favor of Hayes.
    Democrats threatened to boycott Hayes’s inauguration. Rival gov-
ernments arose claiming to recognize Tilden as the rightfully elected
president. Republicans, fearing another sectional crisis, reached out to
Democrats. In what became known as the Compromise of 1877, Dem-
ocrats conceded the presidency to Hayes on the condition that all re-
maining troops would be removed from the South and the South would
receive special economic favors. Hayes was inaugurated in March 1877.
In April, the remaining troops were ordered out of the South. The com-
promise allowed southern Democrats, no longer fearing reprisal from
federal troops or northern politicians for their flagrant violence and in-
timidation of black voters, to return to power.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
430                                                                                 chapte r 15



                                                                         Conservative
              Military District    State                Readmission       Takeover

              District 1           Virginia                 1870             1870
              District 2           North Carolina           1868             1870
                                   South Carolina           1868             1877
              District 3           Alabama                  1868             1874
                                   Florida                  1868             1877
                                   Georgia                  1870             1871
              District 4           Arkansas                 1868             1874
                                   Mississippi              1870             1876
              District 5           Texas                    1870             1873
                                   Louisiana                1868             1877
              None                 Tennessee                1866             1869

             This table shows the military districts of the seceded states of the South,
             the date the state was readmitted into the Union, and the date when
             conservatives recaptured the state house.


                  After 1877, Republicans no longer had the political capital—or po-
             litical will—to intervene in the South in cases of violence and electoral
             fraud. In certain locations with large populations of African Americans,
             such as South Carolina, freedpeople continued to hold some local of-
             fices for several years. Yet, with its most revolutionary aims thwarted by
             1868, and economic depression and political turmoil taking even its most
             modest promises off the table by the early 1870s, most of the promises of
             Reconstruction were unmet.


             VIII. Conclusion
             Reconstruction in the United States achieved Abraham Lincoln’s paramount
             desire: the restoration of the Union. The war and its aftermath forever ended
             legal slavery in the United States, but African Americans remained second-
             class citizens and women still struggled for full participation in the public
             life of the United States. The closing of Reconstruction saw North and South
             reunited behind the imperatives of economic growth and territorial expan-
             sion, rather than ensuring the full rights of its citizens. From the ashes of
             civil war, a new nation faced fresh possibilities while enduring old problems.


             IX. Reference Material
             This chapter was edited by Nicole Turner, with content contributions by Christo-
             pher Abernathy, Jeremiah Bauer, Michael T. Caires, Mari Crabtree, Chris Hayas-
             hida-Knight, Krista Kinslow, Ashley Mays, Keith McCall, Ryan Poe, Bradley
             Proctor, Emma Teitelman, Nicole Turner, and Caitlin Verboon.


       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  431


    Recommended citation: Christopher Abernathy et al., “Reconstruction,”
Nicole Turner, ed., in The American Yawp, eds. Joseph Locke and Ben Wright
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2019).

N o t e s t o C h a p t e r15
     1. Sidney Andrews, The South Since the War: As Shown by Fourteen Weeks
of Travel and Observation in Georgia and the Carolinas (Cambridge, MA:
Welch, Bigelow, 1866), 31.
     2. Eric Foner, Reconstruction: America’s Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877
(New York: HarperCollins, 1988), xxv.
     3. Statutes at Large, Treaties, and Proclamations of the United States of
America, vol. 13 (Boston: Little, Brown, 1866), 737–739. http://​www​.freedmen​
.umd​.edu/​procamn​.htm.
     4. The House Joint Resolution proposing the 13th amendment to the Con-
stitution, January 31, 1865; Enrolled Acts and Resolutions of Congress, 1789-
1999; General Records of the United States Government; Record Group 11; Na-
tional Archives. https://​www​.ourdocuments​.gov/​doc​.php​?flash​=​false​&​doc​=​40​&​
page​=​transcript.
     5. Andrew Johnson, “Proclamation 179—Granting Full Pardon and Am-
nesty for the Offense of Treason Against the United States During the Late Civil
War,” December 25, 1868. Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American
Presidency Project. http://​www​.presidency​.ucsb​.edu/​ws/​?pid​=​72360.
     6. Edward McPherson, The Political History of the United States of America
During the Period of Reconstruction. . . . (Washington, D.C.: Philp and Solo-
mons, 1871), 80–82.
     7. Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name: The Re-enslavement
of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II (New York: Random
House, 2008).
     8. A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Docu-
ments and Debates, 1774–1875, Statutes at Large, 39th Congress, 1st Session, 27.
https://​memory​.loc​.gov/​cgi​-bin/​ampage​?collId​=​llsl​&​fileName​=​014/​llsl014​.db​&​
recNum​=​58.
     9. Eric Foner, Freedom’s Lawmakers: A Directory of Black Officeholders
During Reconstruction (Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 1996).
     10. See Ward McAfee, Religion, Race, and Reconstruction: The Public School
in the Politics of the 1870s (Albany: SUNY Press, 1998); and Hilary Green, Edu-
cational Reconstruction: African American Schools in the Urban South (New
York: Fordham University Press, 2016).
     11. Foner, Freedom’s Lawmakers.
     12. Ibid., xi.
     13. Leslie Harris and Daina Ramey Berry, eds., Slavery and Freedom in Sa-
vannah (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2014), 167.
     14. Steven Hahn et al., eds., Freedom: A Documentary History of Eman-
cipation, 1861–1867, Series 3, Volume 1: Land and Labor, 1865 (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2008), 442–444.



           © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                    Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
432                                                                                        chapte r 15


                  15. Heather Andrea Williams, Help Me to Find My People: The African
             American Search for Family Lost in Slavery (Chapel Hill: University of North
             Carolina Press, 2012).
                  16. Booker T. Washington, Up From Slavery (New York: Doubleday,
             1900), 30.
                  17. Henry H. Mitchell, Black Church Beginnings: The Long-Hidden Reali-
             ties of the First Years (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2004), 141–174.
                  18. Benjamin Mays and Joseph Nicholson, The Negro’s Church (New York:
             Russell and Russell, 1933), 29–30.
                  19. Foner, Reconstruction: America’s Unfinished Revolution, 92.
                  20. See Virginia W. Broughton, Virginia Broughton: The Life and Writings of
             a National Baptist Missionary, ed. Tomeiko Ashford Carter (Knoxville: University
             of Tennessee Press, 2010); Shirley Wilson Logan, We Are Coming: The Persuasive
             Discourse of Nineteenth-Century Black Women (Carbondale: Southern Illinois
             University Press, 1999), 168; and Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, “Religion, Poli-
             tics, and Gender: The Leadership of Nannie Helen Burroughs,” in Judith Weisen-
             feld and Richard Newman, eds., This Far by Faith: Readings in African-American
             Women’s Religious Biography (New York: Routledge, 2014), 157.
                  21. “To the Women of the Republic,” address from the Women’s Loyal
             National League supporting the abolition of slavery, January 25, 1864, SEN
             38A-H20 (Kansas folder); RG 46, Records of the U.S. Senate, National Archives.
             https://​ w ww​ . senate​ . gov/​ a rtandhistory/​ h istory/​ r esources/​ p df/​ Womens​ L oyal​
             National​League​.pdf.
                  22. Proceedings of the Eleventh National Women’s Rights Convention, Held
             at the Church of the Puritans, New York, May 10, 1866 (New York: Johnston,
             1866).
                  23. Frederick Douglass, “We Welcome the Fifteenth Amendment: Addresses
             Delivered in New York, on 12–13 May 1869,” The Frederick Douglass Papers.
             Series One, Speeches, Debates, and Interviews, eds. John W. Blassingame and
             John R. McKivigan (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1991), 213–219.
                  24. Faye E. Dudden, Fighting Chance: The Struggle over Woman Suffrage
             and Black Suffrage in Reconstruction America (New York: Oxford University
             Press, 2011).
                  25. Louise Michele Newman, White Women’s Rights: The Racial Origins of
             Feminism in the United States (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 3–8.
                  26. Sue Davis, The Political Thought of Elizabeth Cady Stanton: Women’s
             Rights and the American Political Traditions (New York: New York University
             Press, 2008), 158.
                  27. Caroline E. Janney, Remembering the Civil War: Reunion and the Limits
             of Reconciliation (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2013), 94.
                  28. Ella Gertrude Clanton Thomas, The Secret Eye: The Journal of Ella Ger-
             trude Clanton Thomas, 1848–1889, ed. Virginia Ingraham Burr (Chapel Hill:
             University of North Carolina Press, 1990), 272–273.
                  29. David Blight, Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory
             (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001), 65–71.



       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Re c on s t ru ct i o n  433


    30. Carl Schurz, Report on the Condition of the South, ed. Michael Burlin-
game (1865; repr. New York: Arno Press, 1969), iii.
    31. Douglas R. Egerton, The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent His-
tory of America’s Most Progressive Era (New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2014),
296.
    32. Elaine Frantz Parsons, Ku-Klux: The Birth of the Klan During Recon-
struction (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2015).
    33. “A Defense of the Ku Klux,” Chester [S.C.] Reporter, January 11, 1872.
    34. Sallie Adkins to Ulysses S. Grant, May 20, 1869. Letters Received,
Source Chronological File, Container #7, 1868–1870: President’s Letters, Folder:
May–December 1869, Record Group 60, General Records of the Department of
Justice, National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland.
    35. Nell Irvin Painter, Creating Black Americans: African-American His-
tory and Its Meanings, 1619 to the Present (New York: Oxford University Press,
2006), 158.
    36. Leonard L. Richards, Who Freed the Slaves? The Fight over the Thir-
teenth Amendment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), 258.
    37. William Fitzhugh Brundage, Lynching in the New South: Georgia and
Virginia, 1880–1930 (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1993), 23.
    38. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name.
    39. Nicholas Lemann, Redemption: The Last Battle of the Civil War (New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2006), 170–209.

R e c omm e n d e d R e a di n g
Blight, David. Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory. Cam-
    bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.
Blum, Edward J. Reforging the White Republic: Race, Religion, and American
    Nationalism, 1865–1898. Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2007.
Cimbala, Paul A. Under the Guardianship of the Nation: The Freedmen’s Bureau
    and the Reconstruction of Georgia, 1865–1870. Athens: University of Geor-
    gia Press, 2003.
Downs, Gregory P. After Appomattox: Military Occupation and the Ends of War.
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.
———. Declarations of Dependence: The Long Reconstruction of Popular Pol-
    itics in the South, 1861–1908. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2014.
Edwards, Laura F. A Legal History of the Civil War and Reconstruction: A Na-
    tion of Rights. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Egerton, Douglas R. The Wars of Reconstruction: The Brief, Violent History of
    America’s Most Progressive Era. New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2014.
Foner, Eric. Reconstruction: America’s Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877. New
    York: HarperCollins, 1988.
Franke, Katherine M. “Becoming a Citizen: Reconstruction Era Regulation of
    African American Marriages.” Yale Journal of Law and Humanities 11, no. 2
    (1999): 251–310.



          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
434                                                                         chapte r 15


             Hahn, Steven. A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural
                 South from Slavery to the Great Migration. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
                 versity Press, 2003.
             Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement
                 in the Black Baptist Church, 1880–1920. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
                 sity Press, 1993.
             Hunter, Tera W. To ’Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women’s Lives and La-
                 bors After the Civil War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998.
             Janney, Caroline E. Remembering the Civil War: Reunion and the Limits of Rec-
                 onciliation. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2013.
             Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and
                 the Family, from Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic Books, 2010.
             Kantrowitz, Stephen. More Than Freedom: Fighting for Black Citizenship in a
                 White Republic, 1829–1889. New York: Penguin, 2012.
             Lemann, Nicholas. Redemption: The Last Battle of the Civil War. New York:
                 Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2006.
             Masur, Kate. An Example for All the Land: Emancipation and the Struggle over
                 Equality in Washington, D.C. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
                 Press, 2010.
             Nelson, Megan Kate. Ruin Nation: Destruction and the American Civil War.
                 Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2012.
             Parsons, Elaine Frantz. Ku-Klux: The Birth of the Klan During Reconstruction.
                 Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2015.
             Richardson, Heather Cox. The Death of Reconstruction: Race, Labor, and Poli-
                 tics in the Post–Civil War North, 1865–1901. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
                 versity Press, 2001.
             ———. West from Appomattox: The Reconstruction of America After the Civil
                 War. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008.
             Rosen, Hannah. Terror in the Heart of Freedom: Citizenship, Sexual Violence,
                 and the Meaning of Race in the Postemancipation South. Chapel Hill: Uni-
                 versity of North Carolina Press, 2009.
             Saville, Julie. The Work of Reconstruction: From Slave to Wage Laborer in South
                 Carolina 1860–1870. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
             Silber, Nina. The Romance of Reunion: Northerners and the South, 1865–1900.
                 Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997.
             Wilson, Charles Reagan. Baptized in Blood: The Religion of the Lost Cause,
                 1865–1920. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2009.




       © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
Contributors


E di t or s                                       Susan O’Donovan, University of Memphis
Joseph Locke, University of Houston-Victoria      Heather C. Richardson, Boston College
Ben Wright, University of Texas at Dallas         Edward Rugemer, Yale University
                                                  John D. Saillant, Western Michigan University
E di t or i a l A dv i s or s                     Martha A. Sandweiss, Princeton University
Edward L. Ayers, University of Richmond           Claudio Saunt, University of Georgia
Randall Balmer, Dartmouth University              Leigh Eric Schmidt, Washington University in
Robin Blackburn, University of Essex                  St. Louis
Edward J. Blum, San Diego State University        Carole Shammas, University of Southern
Christopher L. Brown, Columbia University             California
Jorge Cañizares-Esguerra, University of Texas     Richard White, Stanford University
Joyce Chaplin, Harvard University                 Samuel Zipp, Brown University
Jefferson R. Cowie, Cornell University
Hasia R. Diner, New York University               Dig i ta l C on t e n t A dv i s or s
Darren Dochuk, Washington University in           David J. Bodenhamer, Indiana University
     St. Louis                                    Christopher D. Cantwell, University of Missouri-
Ellen DuBois, University of California,                Kansas City
     Los Angeles                                  Amy Earhart, Texas A&M University
Erica Armstrong Dunbar, University of             Kathleen Fitzpatrick, Michigan State University
     Delaware                                     Tona Hangen, Worcester State University
Nicole Etcheson, Ball State University            Jason Heppler, Stanford University
María Cristina García, Cornell University         Kim Gallon, Purdue University
Thavolia Glymph, Duke University                  Alex Gil Fuentes, Columbia University
Pekka Hämäläinen, University of Oxford            Matthew K. Gold, CUNY Graduate Center
Leslie M. Harris, Emory University                Jennifer Guiliano, University of Maryland
Allyson Hobbs, Stanford University                Cathy Moran Hajo, New York University
Woody Holton, University of South Carolina        Lauren Klein, Georgia Tech
Daniel Martin HoSang, University of Oregon        Jeffrey McClurken, University of Mary
Stephen Kantrowitz, University of Wisconsin            Washington
Michael Kazin, Georgetown University              Tara McPherson, University of Southern
David Konig, Washington University in St. Louis        California
Karen Kupperman, New York University              Lincoln Mullen, George Mason University
T. J. Jackson Lears, Rutgers University           Robert K. Nelson, University of Richmond
Chandra M. Manning, Georgetown University         Bethany Nowviskie, University of Virginia
Kate Masur, Northwestern University               Miriam Posner, University of California,
W. Caleb McDaniel, Rice University                     Los Angeles
James Merrell, Vassar College                     Darren R. Reid, University of Edinburgh
Jo-Ann Morgan, Western Illinois University        Kyle Roberts, Loyola University Chicago

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 3 6 c ontr ibu tor s


Jentery Sayers, University of Victoria             Brandy Thomas Wells, Augusta College
Kelly Schrum, George Mason University              Jonathan Wilfred Wilson, University of Scranton
Lisa Spiro, Rice University                           and Marywood University
Erik Steiner, Stanford University
Mark Tebeau, Arizona State University              I m ag e C u r a t or s
Lauren Tilton, Yale University                     Erin Holmes, University of South Carolina
Kathryn Tomasek, Wheaton College                   Katherine Lennard, Stanford University
Andrew J. Torget, University of North Texas        Jo-Ann Morgan, Western Illinois University
William J. Turkel, University of Western Ontario   Christina Regelski, Rice University
Lauren Tilton, Yale University                     Amy Sopcak-Joseph, University of Connecticut
Kathryn Tomasek, Wheaton College                   Whitney Stewart, University of Texas at Dallas
Andrew J. Torget, University of North Texas        Colleen Tripp, California State University,
William J. Turkel, University of Western Ontario       Northridge

C h a p t e r E di t or s                          C on t r i bu t or s
Samuel Abramson, Rice University                   Christopher L. Abernathy, University of
Ellen Adams, Alice T. Miner Museum                      Oklahoma
Richard Anderson, Princeton University             Gregory Ablavsky, Stanford Law School
Lauren Brand, Southern Nazarene University         Sam Abramson, Rice University
Edwin Breeden, Old Exchange Building and Old       Ellen Adams, William and Mary
    Slave Mart Museum                              Alvita Akiboh, Northwestern University
Emily Conroy-Krutz, Michigan State University      Jim Ambuske, University of Virginia
Ari Cushner, San Jose State University             Richard A. Anderson, Princeton University
Matthew Downs, University of Mobile                Seth Anziska, University College London
Angela Esco Elder, Converse College                Kelly B. Arehart, William and Mary
Jesse Gant, University of Wisconsin                Carolyn Arena, Omohundro Institute of Early
Jane Fiegen Green, American Historical                  American History and Culture
    Association                                    Emily Arendt, Montana State University
Paula Fortier, Independent Researcher                   Billings
Nathaniel Green, Northern Virginia Community       Jeffrey Bain-Conkin, Notre Dame University
    College                                        Andrew Baker, Texas A&M University–
Michael Hammond, Taylor University                      Commerce
Michael Hattem, Yale University                    Thomas Balcerski, Eastern Connecticut State
Mary Anne Henderson, University of                      University
    Washington                                     Simon Balto, Ball State University
David Hochfelder, University at Albany, SUNY       Laila Ballout, Northwestern University
Daniel Johnson, Bilkent University                 Seth Bartee, Guilford Technical Community
Amy Kohout, Colorado College                            College
Gregg Lightfoot, The Girls Preparatory School      Marco Basile, Harvard University
James McKay, University of Wisconsin               Jeremiah Bauer, University of Nebraska
William Schultz, Princeton University              Joshua Beatty, SUNY Plattsburgh
Nora Slonimsky, Iona College                       Amanda Bellows, The New School
Tara Strauch, College of Wooster                   Jacob Betz, Harvard University
David Thomson, Sacred Heart University             Marsha Barrett, University of Illinois at
Nicole Turner, Virginia Commonwealth University         Urbana-Champaign
Andrew Wegmann, Delta State University             Ian Beamish, Johns Hopkins University

              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
c on trib u t o r s 437


Myles Beaupre, Notre Dame University               Lori Daggar, Ursinus College
Ethan R. Bennett, Washington University in         Andrew David, Boston University
    St. Louis                                      Morgan Deane, Brigham Young University-Idaho
Daniel Birge, Boston University                    Jenifer Dodd, Vanderbilt University
William Black, Rice University                     Jean-Paul de Guzman, University of California,
John Blanton, The City College of New York              Los Angeles
Drew Bledsoe, Lee University                       Matthew Downs, University of Mobile
Cameron Blevins, Northeastern University           Jennifer Donnally, University of North Carolina
Nicholas Blood, Emory University                   Mary Draper, Midwestern State University
Eladio Bobadilla, Duke University                  Dan Du, University of Georgia
Lauren Brand, Southern Nazarene University         Blake Earle, Southern Methodist University
Edwin Breeden, Old Exchange Building and Old       Ashton Ellett, University of Georgia
    Slave Mart Museum                              Angela Esco Elder, Converse College
Michael Brenes, Yale University                    Alexandra Evans, University of Virginia
Marjorie Brown, Houston Community College          Sean Fear, University of Leeds
Kyle Burke, Northwestern University                Maggie Flamingo, University of Wisconsin
L. D. Burnett, Tarleton State University           Paula Fortier, University of New Orleans
Alexander Burns, Ball State University             Jeff Fortnoy, University of Oklahoma
Carole Butcher, North Dakota State University      Michael Franczak, Boston College
Matthew A. Byron, Young Harris College             Leif Fredrickson, University of Virginia
Michael T. Caires, University of Virginia          Zach Fredman, Dartmouth College
Christina Carrick, Boston University               Stephanie Gamble, Johns Hopkins University
Michelle Cassidy, Central Michigan University      Jesse Gant, University of Wisconsin
Peter Catapano, New York City College of           Josh Garrett-Davis, Autry Museum of the
    Technology                                          American West
Steffi Cerato, Johns Hopkins University            Zach P. Gastellum, University of Oklahoma
Andrew Chadwick, University of Maryland            Jamie Goodall, Stevenson University
Tizoc Chavez, Vanderbilt University                Jonathan Grandage, Florida State University
Christopher Childers, Pittsburg State University   Larry A. Grant, The Citadel
Micah Childress, Grand Valley State University     Anne Gray Fischer, Brown University
Mary Beth Basile Chopas, University of North       Kori Graves, University at Albany, SUNY
    Carolina                                       Jane Fiegen Green, American Historical
Frank Cirillo, University of Virginia                   Association
Justin Clark, Nanyang Technological University     Nathaniel Green, Northern Virginia Community
Dana Cochran, Virginia Tech                             College
Kristin Condotta Lee, Washington University in     Robert Gudmestad, Colorado State University
    St. Louis                                      Joseph Haker, University of Minnesota
Emily Conroy-Krutz, Michigan State University      Blaine Hamilton, Rice University
Christopher Consolino, Johns Hopkins               Tracey Hanshew, Washington State University
    University                                     Caroline Bunnell Harris, University of
Adam Constanzo, Texas A&M Corpus Christi                California, Los Angeles
Wiliam Cossen, Penn State University               Michael Hattem, Yale University
Aaron Cowan, Slippery Rock University              Karissa Haugeberg, Tulane University
Mari Crabtree, College of Charleston               Chris Hayashida-Knight, Penn State University
Michell Cresfield, Vanderbilt University           Richara Leona Hayward, University of
Ari Cushner, San Jose State University                  Pennsylvania

          © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                   Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 3 8 c ontr ibu tor s


Timothy C. Hemmis, Texas A&M University–          Allison Lange, Wentworth Institute of Technology
    Central Texas                                 Kathryn Knowles Lasdow, Columbia University
Mary Anne Henderson, University of                Brooke Lamperd, Brown University
    Washington                                    Scott Libson, Emory University
Mariah Hepworth, Northwestern University          Gregg Lightfoot, The Girls Preparatory School
Jordan Hill, Virginia Tech University             Matthew Linton, Brandeis University
Hidetaka Hirota, Columbia University              Kyle Livie, Oholone College
David Hochfelder, University at Albany, SUNY      Jennifer Mandel, Mount Washington College
Nicolas Hoffmann, Oak Mountain Academy            John Garrison Marks, American Association for
Lilian Hoodes, Northwestern University                State and Local History
Rebecca Howard, University of Arkansas            Dawn Marsh, Purdue University
Amanda Hughett, Duke University                   Valerie A. Martinex, University of Texas
Kylie A. Hulbert, Texas A&M University–           Paul Matzko, Penn State University
    Kingsville                                    Ashley Mays, University of North Carolina
Matthew C. Hulbert, University of Georgia         Lisa Mercer, University of Illinois at
Jonathan Hunt, Stanford University                    Urbana-Champaign
Jun Suk Hyun University of Georgia                Spencer McBride, Louisiana State University
Hendrick Isom, Brown University                   Keith D. McCall, Rice University
Zachary Jacobson, Northwestern University         Charles McCrary, Florida State University
Destin Jenkins, University of Chicago             Katherine J. McGarr, University of Wisconsin
Nathan Jérémie-Brink, New Brunswick               James McKay, University of Wisconsin
    Theological Seminary                          José Juan Pérez Meléndez, University of
D. Andrew Johnson, Rice University                    California, Davis
Daniel Johnson, Bilkent University                Ryan T. Menath, U.S. Air Force Academy
Christopher C. Jones, Brigham Young University    Samantha Miller, University of Pennsylvania
Matthew Kahn, Northwestern University             Shaul Mitelpunkt, University of York
Suzanne Kahn, Columbia University                 Elisa Minoff, University of South Florida
Micki Kaufman, CUNY Graduate Center               Maria Montalvo, Tulane University
Lindsay Keiter, Penn State Altoona                Celeste Day Moore, Hamilton College
William Kelly, Rutgers University                 Erik A. Moore, University of Oklahoma
Brenden Kennedy, University of Montana            Gregory Moore, Notre Dame College
    Western                                       Jessica Parker Moore, Texas Christian University
S. Wright Kennedy, Rice University                Joseph Moore, Gardner-Webb University
William Kerrigan, Muskingum University            Isabella Morales, Princeton University
Krista Kinslow, Boston University                 Felicia Moralez, University of Notre Dame
Jonathan Koefoed, Belhaven University             Melissa Morris, Bridgewater State University
Gerard Koeppel, Independent Scholar               Christen Mucher, Smith College
Stephn M. Koeth, Columbia University              Andrea Nero, University at Buffalo, SUNY
Amy Kohout, Colorado College                      Christopher Null, University of California,
Erin Bonuso Kramer, University of Wisconsin           Los Angeles
Dale Kretz, Texas Tech University                 James Owen, University of Georgia
Matthew Kruer, University of Chicago              Brooke Palmieri, University College London
Mark Kukis, Keck Graduate Institute               R. Joseph Parrott, The Ohio State University
Lucie Kyrova, Charles University                  Adam Parsons, Syracuse University
Guy Lancaster, Central Arkansas Library System    Ryan Poe, Duke University



              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
c on trib u t o r s 439


Matthew Pressman, Seton Hall University          Bill Speer, American Military University
Emily Alise Prifogle, Princeton University       Daniel Spillman, Oklahoma Baptist University
Bradley Proctor, University of North Carolina    Kate Sohasky, Johns Hopkins University
Ansley Quiros, University of North Alabama       Marie Stango, California State University,
Laura Redford, UCLA                                   Bakersfield
Michelle Reeves, US Naval War College            Megan Stanton, University of Wisconsin
Ronny Regev, The Hebrew University of            Rowan Steinecker, University of Central
    Jerusalem                                         Oklahoma
Emily Remus, University of Notre Dame            Colin Stephenson, Ohio State University
Colin Reynolds, Emory University                 Gregory N. Stern, Florida State University
Leah Richier, University of Georgia              Whitney Stewart, University of Texas at Dallas
Julie Richter, William and Mary                  Tara Strauch, University of South Carolina
Bryan Rindfleisch, Marquette University          Joseph Super, University of West Virginia
Angela Riotto, University of Akron               Jordan Taylor, Indiana University
John P. Riley, Binghamton University, SUNY       Michael Harrison Taylor, University of Georgia
James Risk, University of South Carolina         Emma Teitelman, University of Pennsylvania
Andrew Robichaud, Stanford University            Chris Thomas, Reynolds Community College
Michael Robinson, University of Mobile           Susan Thomas, University of North Carolina at
Cara Rogers, Rice University                          Greensboro
Katherine Rohrer, University of North Georgia    Robert John Thompson III, Southern Mississippi
Emily Romeo, Depaul University                   David Thomson, Sacred Heart University
Nick Rowland, University of Texas                Patrick Troester, University of Akron
Brent Ruswick, West Chester University           Ann Tucker, University of North Georgia
Matthew K. Saionz, University of Florida         Nicole Turner, Virginia Commonwealth
John Saillant, Western Michigan University            University
Christopher Paul Sawula, Emory University        Ashley Rose Young, Smithsonian Institution
Ian Saxine, Northwestern University              Caitlin Verboon, Yale University
David Schley, Hong Kong Baptist University       Alyce Vigil, Northern Oklahoma College
John Schmitz, Northern Virginia Community        James Wainwright, Prince George’s Community
    College                                           College
Kristopher Shields, Rutgers University           Kevin Waite, Durham University
Evgenia Shnayder Shoop, University of            Kaylynn Washnock, University of Georgia
    Pennsylvania                                 C. Ruth Watterson, Harvard University
Cameron Shriver, Ohio State University           Benjamin Weber, Harvard University
Matt Simmons, University of Florida              Kelly B. Weber, Rice University
Donna Sinclair, University of Central Michigan   Andrew Wegmann, Delta State University
Phillip Luke Sinitiere, College of Biblical      James Wellborn, Georgia College
    Studies                                      Brandy Thomas Wells, Augusta College
William E. Skidmore, Rice University             Benjamin Wetzel, University of Notre Dame
Elizabeth Skilton, University of Louisiana at    Luke Willert, Harvard University
    Lafayette                                    Mason B. Williams, Williams College
Nora Slonimsky, Iona College                     Naomi R. Williams, The College at Brockport,
Katherine Smoak, Johns Hopkins University             SUNY
Christopher Sparshott, Northwestern University   Jonathan Wilfred Wilson, University of
    in Qatar                                          Scranton and Marywood University



         © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
4 4 0 c ontr ibu tor s


Kevin Wisniewski, University of Maryland,         Nathan Wuertenberg, Ball State University
   Baltimore County                               Charlton Yingling, University of Louisville
Nicholas Wood, Spring Hill College                Kevin Young, University of Georgia
Michael E. Woods, Marshall University             Rebecca Zimmer, University of Southern
Garrett Wright, University of North Carolina         Mississippi




              © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
                       Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
         Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. www.americanyawp.com
